How startups are trying to fix consumer debt

Consumerdebtremains one of the biggest challenges with the American economy. Theaverage household has $132,086 indebt, anddebtinterest payments represent 9 percentof the average household income.Consumerdebthas skyrocketed recently, primarily because the rise in the cost of living has outpaced income growth over the past 12 years. While median household income has grown 26 percent since 2003, household expenses have outpaced income growth significantly, with medical costs growing by 51 percent and food and beverage prices increasing by 37 percentin the same time period.

When you dissectconsumerdebteven further, you start to realize some sad realities.Medical bills are the No. 1 source of bankruptcies in America, and63 percent of Americans don’t have enough savings to cover a $500 emergency.

The silver lining is that with tough, sizeable problems comes the opportunity for tech companies and investors to build solutions to address them. Here are some of thestartupshelping Americans getoutofdebt.

Mortgages are the highestconsumerdebtcategoryat a staggering $8.25 trillion.SoFiactually started its business in the student loan space with a very simple premise: Your educational background is highly correlated with your creditworthiness over time.

Not only have they become a leader in the mortgage space, they’ve also started to leverage the wealth ofconsumerdata that is available today to improve underwriting accuracy and lower total borrowing costs. In addition to their ability to offer better rates, they now provide additional credit options to “qualified” buyers by offering mortgages up to $3 million for as little as 10 percent down without requiring private mortgage interest, which has traditionally been a huge cost to borrowers who cannot come up with the 20 percent down payment.

As mentioned, medical bills are the No. 1 source of bankruptcies in America. Whilehealthcare costs have increasedby 51 percent since 2003,patients pay $120 billion each year as a result of medical billing errors and overcharges— usually unbeknownst to them. The reality is that patients are disproportionately bearing the brunt of a broken medical billing industry.

EnterRemedy. Remedy has developed a proprietary technology platform that combines powerful error detection algorithms with a network of medical billing specialists to eliminate unnecessary medical errors and overcharges. As a result, Remedy identifies errors and overcharges on 70 percent of the bills it reviews, saving the average American family $1,000 a year on their medical bills. Remedy even goes back through your last 12 months of claims and corrects any inaccuracies, reviews prescriptions and provides automatic reimbursements for FSAs and HSAs.

The average household has a whopping$15,310 in credit carddebt. Despite its recent fall from fame in the public markets, the innovation thatLending Clubbrought to theconsumerlending market has been truly revolutionary.

Gone are the days of >30 percent APR loans from banks being your only option, and the opacity around the underwriting process and fees has gone away. Lending Club gives personal loans based on you as an individual person and your future earning potential (factors beyond your credit score such as education, hobbies, etc.), and lowers your interest rate by an average of 32 percent.

Student loandebtis now at $1.3 trillion, the second highest of anyconsumerdebtcategory. The average student leaves college with$25,000 worth of student loansand ends up having to service these loans till they are well into their thirties.Earnestallows students to refinance and consolidate their loans, and, more importantly, to figureouta monthly payment plan that grows in tandem with their career trajectory. To date, Earnest has saved clients an average of $17,936. Interestingly, credit scores are not even taken into consideration in their underwriting process.

So what will the next batch ofstartupsin this space go after?

Mintwas great at laying the foundation here and acting as aconsumer’s spending advisor, but my prediction is that the next wave ofstartupswill take this one step further to help consumers stay on track to manage theirdebtobligation and scale back their lifestyle (when necessary) to avoid getting into a tough financial situation.

One such startup that has a lot of promise isTrim. It currently helps consumers analyze unnecessary subscriptions on their credit card bills, and this could easily be extended to help consumers scale back on big “spending buckets” or find cheaper capital sources for existingdebt.

There are more than 36 million “revolvers” in the U.S. carrying >$320 billion in balances with anaverage APR of ~20 percent. One of the reasons why credit card companies continue to charge these exorbitant rates is because the supply side of the equation functions like an oligopoly, where only a few banks have access to underwriting thisdebt.

While peer-to-peer platforms like Lending Club have certainly provided more liquidity, the bigger challenge is building shared data underwriting platforms. Smaller regional banks that actually hold the majority of deposits in America have not had access to these high-yield assets, as they do not have the infrastructure to underwrite these loans on their own. But if there was a service that could run the analysis and package credit carddebtto these smaller banks, credit carddebtwould become more affordable.

The primary reason consumers are riddled withdebtis because the interest accumulation almost negates any repayment on the loan. This might be idealistic, but if there’s some way consumers could trade future income in return for a currentdebtreduction, that would solve much of the problem. Many would say this solution has been suggested before, so why would it work now?

Again, the wealth of data on consumers that is available today allows lenders to accurately predict future earning potential and their associated cash flows. I love whatUpstarthas done for fresh graduates and aspiring entrepreneurs. Take my friend Ian Shakil for example — he raised $55,000 through Upstart, and now he’s the CEO of a super-successful company,Augmedix, that has raised more than $36 million to date. Investors in Ian now get a percentage of his income that will add up to well more than $55,000. I call that a win-win situation for everyone.

Technology has definitely brought huge efficiencies to the financial services industry, especially in relation to the distribution of personal financial products. But taking a concerted effort to tackleconsumerdebtis something new. We need to continue supporting entrepreneurs who seek innovation in this space. If we succeed, we would alleviate one of the largest stressors on the American economy.