Industrial giants borrow a page from the tech playbook

If you’re an executive at an industrial company, you’ve likely been grappling with theindustrial Internet of Things. The rapid development of technologies that connect every part of our lives has moved from our smart phone to the jet engine. There’s perhaps no greater testament to the importance of this connectivity than General Electric’s massive effort to rebrand itself as the“digital industrial”to attract the world’s best technologists. IoT’s emergence is causing leading manufacturers to rethink their go-to-market strategies and take a page from the technology playbook: subscriptions.

Historically, manufacturing companies and OEM providers have operated in a capital expense (CAPEX) environment, meaning their revenue has come from selling a certain component or product to another company in a one-time, upfront transaction. The shift to a subscription model, or operating expense (OPEX), means manufacturing companies and OEM providers can now generate recurring, long-term revenue from the successful operation of, rather than the sale of, their products.

This new approach creates a smoother stream of cash flow for providers, while customers are assured that they have the most up-to-date products and that they’re only paying for what they need.

Think of it as the Zipcar model for manufacturing. Customers are not purchasing the vehicle, and thus are not responsible for the risks associated with ownership (repairs, insurance, storage, etc.); they simply pay for the operational benefit of having a car. It has already proven successful: Gartner’sBuilding a Strategy for the Subscription Economyreport shows that “about 35 percent of global industrial enterprises project[ed] five percent incremental revenue from subscription-based services in 2015.”

The subscription model will only be successful if the manufacturer offering the subscription has a way to track and manage the performance of that part or product remotely. If a company is paid on the successful operation of their product, it has to ensure that quality never slips. Here are a few early success stories that show the impact this model is having on the sector:

As IoT advancements shift the economy toward an outcome- and performance-based model, industrial companies will increasingly explore commercial strategies pioneered by global tech and software innovators. The transformation is underway, and the companies that invest in this new model now will ultimately reap the rewards.