Anarchy or ecstasy in the UK? Study to reveal Brexit impact at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on 5-6 December. Today we’re delighted to say James Wise, Partner withBaldertonCapital is also joining our panel on the theme of the impact of Brexit on startups in the UK and Europe.

Wise will reveal results of a custom study on the fallout Brexit could have on the UK and European talent and startup ecosystems, as part of our robust discussion on the subject. We will announce more names in the coming days but trust me this one will undoubtedly make headlines on the day.

James is, reputedly, the youngest partner of any Series A Venture Fund in Europe. Since joining Balderton in 2012, he has led on investments across Europe in sectors such as mobile productivity, 3D printing, VR/AR tools, and SaaS platforms. Two companies that James has worked with have exited to Microsoft and Amazon. Before joining Balderton, James helped set up and run one of the UK’s first social impact funds, and previously worked as an advisor to the British Parliament, as well as at McKinsey & Company.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

If you want to display your company then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Early Bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. Youcan get your tickets at this priceuntil 4 November.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts. To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.