Tech needs to stamp out anti-blackness

In the U.S., it’s as if laws and regulations only apply to people of color — and when people of color bend them, they lose their lives. When white tech CEOs bend the laws at massive scale, they’re rewarded with billions of dollars and prestige.

“You know how Silicon Valley advocates an Uber-esque model where everybody is an entrepreneur, disrupting markets while the law lags behind?” Anil Dash, a prominent figure and diversity advocate in the tech industry,posted on Twitter earlier today. In a follow-up tweet,he wrote, “Realize that#EricGarner&#AltonSterlingwere brutally killed for being black while selling (cigarettes & CDs) cheap consumer products.”

Last night, two Baton Rouge, Louisiana police officers fatally shot Alton Sterling, a 37-year-old black man whose left arm was pinned down, according to a video captured by a bystander. Sterling’s right arm was not visible in the video. In the video, two officers are seen holding down Sterling and later someone can be heard saying, “He’s got a gun! Gun!” Shortly after, the video shows an officer pulling out a gun. You can’t see the shots fired, but you do hear them. Sterling was pronounced dead on the scene from multiple gunshot wounds to the chest and back.

Police were initially responding to a tip from an anonymous 911 caller that a man in a red shirt was selling CDs outside a convenience store and pointed a gun at someone,according to the Baton Rouge Police Department.

Dash drew a compelling connection between how Uber and Airbnb’s businesses — both run by white men — are predicated on breaking the law and asking for forgiveness. They’re rewarded with billions of dollars in valuations, while Sterling andEric Garnerlose their lives for selling CDs and cigarettes, respectively.

“#AltonSterling&#EricGarnerwere killed by cops for bending the law to far lesser degree than execs at AirBNB & Uber. Billions vs bullets,”Dash tweeted. That “billions vs bullets” comment really jumped out at me. It pretty much sums up what racism, anti-blackness and white privilege looks like.

Tech is the most powerful, wealthiest industry in the world, and our antiblackness is so pervasive we can't even say it.

— anildash.com (@anildash)July 6, 2016

Dash later clarified that his“point on this thread is to call voices in the tech community [he’s] part of to speak up against violently antiblack systems.”

Other people in the tech industry have chimed in today, like Shervin Pishevar, executive chairman of Hyperloop One and founder at Sherpa Capital, and Tiffani Ashley Bell of The Human Utility, formerly known as Detroit Water Project, whoengaged in a back-and-forth on Twitterabout developing tools to combat police brutality and anti-blackness. It started when Pishevartweeted an ideafor a tech solution that could potentially save lives from police brutality.

and it would be amazing to see you work to stamp out anti-blackness in your sphere of true influence, tech + VC.

— Tiffani Ashley Bell (@tiffani)July 6, 2016

Pishevar also said that “we should use all tools and techniques to stamp out these murderous rates of brutality and fight anti-blackness,” and that he has already started doing some work around this. I’ve reached out to Pishevar and will update this story when I get more details.