Nicole Eagan, CEO of Darktrace, to speak at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! Grab ticketshere. Today we’re delighted to say Nicole Eagan, Chief Executive Officer, Darktrace is also speaking.

Nicole has led the company since 2014, and rapidly grown it into a global leader in cyber defense. Winner of ‘Woman of the Year’ award at The Cyber Security Awards 2016, Ms. Eagan has an extensive career in technology leadership with over 25 years of commercial and marketing expertise, turning fundamental ideas into real world products and helping companies scale. Under Nicole’s leadership, Darktrace’s machine learning and mathematical approach to cyber defense has won over 40 awards including World Economic Forum Technology Pioneer. Darktrace, headquartered in Cambridge, England and San Francisco, CA, has raised over $90 million to fund its global expansion and now has 300 employees working across 18 countries.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your ticketsat this price until 4 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.