TransferWise co-founder Taavet Hinrikus to speak at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis fast coming up on December 5-6, and the speakers just keep coming. Today we’re delighted to say Taavet Hinrikus is also joining.

Hinrikus is co-founder and CEO ofTransferWise, the international money transfer platform. At TransferWise, he looks after marketing, product development, PR, and investor relations. Hinrikus also serves as an Advisor at Ambient Sound Investments and RedMart Pte. Ltd. As Skype’s first employee, he helped build a company that has literally connected millions of people. He’s since helped various companies as an angel investor and advisor. He is also a digital advisor for the Prime Minister of Estonia and an angel investor. His investments include Tweetdeck, Mendeley, OMGPOP, Betaworks, Sunrise and Mapillary among others.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece.You can get your tickets at this priceuntil 4 November.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.