Venture capital is a hell of a drug

There has beenalot of money sloshing around the startup world for the past few years. Cheap and accessiblecapitalhas advantages: More founders get the opportunity to pursue big dreams and previously “unfundable companies” not only raise huge amounts of money, but some ultimately achieve unicorn status.

Discussions about the downside of this trend are usually related to systemic risks, like theperpetual bubble talk, but few are discussing the problem as it relates to founders — morecapitalequals more risk. But who is bearing this risk, and what really is the downside? Sure,capitalproviders are taking this risk — but they aren’t the only ones.

Onashort-term basis, raising VC reducesafounder’s personal risk by allowing the team to drawasalary. Founders don’t need to put development costs onacredit card or face short-term economic hardship. But while counter-intuitive, raisingventurecapitalmakes your startup riskier in two key ways.

You limit your exits

VC cash comes at the cost of reduced exit flexibility and the burden of an increased burn rate. Viewed probabilistically, the most likely positive exit forastartup is an acquisition for less than $50 million. This outcome has little benefit to VCs, and they will happily trade it for an improbable shot atahigher outcome.

I regularly see entrepreneurs agonize overapercent of dilution, while ignoring the fact that they are surrendering their most likely exit options foralow-probability shot at buildingasuperstar startup. Billions of dollars have been outright wasted by founders selling future value that didn’t materialize, while surrendering present value that could have been navigated to great success. My advice: Don’t give up your present forafuture you haven’t validated.

You increase burn to dangerous levels

Beyond signing away exit options, newventurecapitaltypically is raised to fund higher burn rates. That increased burn rate isagreat investment when it is being used to fuelamodel that is working. More often, the increased burn is used to search foramodel that works, and the company quickly learns thatcapitalhas no insights; it’s just money. Then the company cannot sustain the burn, the CEO decides to cut the burn way too late and cannotmanufacture enough VC enthusiasmto keep the dream alive.

Every dollar you spend isadollar of dilution. One rough rule of thumb is that startups should be able to triple their post-money valuationin two years. If you can’t figure out how to get 3X leverage on every dollar you spend, you’re better off not spending the dollars — or raising them in the first place.

Founders need to think ofventurecapitalasapower tool —afairly dangerous one — but instead often mistake it for some magical, infinitely renewable resource. In the right hands, power tools can solve some real problems. Used incorrectly, they can chop off your hands.

Billion-dollar exits are brilliant, but they shouldn’t be how founders calibrate success. The mania for billion-dollar valuations is the result of the business model of theventurecapitalmarket — not some legitimate definition of startup success.

Here’savery rough illustration of billion-dollar VC fund logic:

This is why there is so much focus on billion-dollar exits. Not because this outcome is high frequency, but becauseafew massive funds need it to be so. Let’s not just point fingers at the billion-dollar funds. Similar VC math causes irrational trade-offs for founders whether their investors have billion-dollar funds or quarter-billion-dollar funds.

Asageneral rule of thumb, assume that your exit needs to be approximately the size of the VC fund to “matter” in its returns. Of course, this is the tail wagging the dog, as thecapitalgatherers are encouraging irrational behavior of founders withasales pitch of “go big or go home.” No one says the truth, which is “go big or ruin your life.”

When your business fails, which probability says it most likely will, that VC has 29 more shots on goal. You destroyed your single startup, not to mention the wasted sacrifice over years of your life. In most VC deals, the investor is taking much less risk than the founder.

This is just fine forasubset of founders. It’s great that Ferraris exist, but it doesn’t make sense for the average person to mortgage their home and their future to buy one whenaToyota Prius can fetch groceries just fine.

If one of your goals is making money, focusing on the exit price isabad idea. It’s quitepossible to sellastartup forabillion dollars and make less than someone who sells theirs for $100 million.

For example, the Huffington Post was reportedly acquired for $314 million, and Arianna Huffington made about $18 million. Michael Arrington sold TechCrunch to the same buyer for $30 million and reportedly kept $24 million. ToaVC, TechCrunch’s sale would have beena“loss,” and many VCs would have pushed Michael not to sell. Yet Arrington was more successful, financially, than Huffington.

Practice efficient entrepreneurship

One argument I’ve heard from many VCs is thatafounder won’t buildabillion-dollar startup unless they go all-in from the start. This is nonsense — to becomeabillion-dollar business,afounder first needs to builda$10 million business. Founders shouldn’t jump to the end game before they’re ready. You focus on the first step and still becomeahuge player in the end.

This is empirically true — just look atWayfair,Braintree,Shutterstock,SurveyMonkey,Plenty of Fish,Shopify,Lynda,GitHub,Atlassian,MailChimp,Epic,Campaign Monitor,Minecraft,LootCrate,Unity,CarGurusandSimpliSafeto name justafew. None of these startups embraced the “billions or bust” mentality at the start, though many are worth billions now. Most took very littleventurecapitaluntil after they proved out product/market fit and knew how they could use the money to accelerate growth. Some didn’t take anycapitalat all.

All were hyper-efficient in the way they usedcapitalfrom Day One. Several have gone public,afew have been acquired for billion-dollar sums. I don’t fetishize bootstrapping, but there isalot to learn by studying how these founders built huge businesses with efficient use ofcapital.

Smart people, dumb money

I was very happy to build and sellastartup for nearly $100 million, and while I would have liked to buildabillion-dollar business, too many founders treat the probability of either outcome as close to equal. Earning billion-dollar exits is startup nirvana, for sure. But selling for $500 million isahome run, $100 million exits are amazing and $50 million exits can change the lives of families for generations. Evena“humble” million-dollar exit can makeahuge difference inafounder’s life.

The point is, don’t be so quick to irrationally trade all of those options! Only trade these options when you’ve proven enough to have confidence that the future value of your company will be much higher.Capitalhas no insights. Don’t tradeasolid business foralottery ticket.

Irrationally raising money to scale something that doesn’t work does not result in buildingabig business. Founders should focus on smart growth and use VC to support that — instead of treating it likeasteroid. Make efficient entrepreneurship your mantra. By all means, dream big — I’m not arguing that founders build small companies, solving small problems. If you havealegitimate need forcapital, by all means raise it. But on the flip side, don’t sell your chance for success by giving up optionality and prematurely scaling burn rate in the name of fundraising glory.

Venturecapitalisn’t the right choice for most businesses, but when used well, it can be very powerful. Unfortunately, many VC-backed founders are using it incorrectly.