YCombinator makes every SimCity player’s dream reality with new research initiative

Ever wanted to design a city from scratch?

All those years tinkering with SimCity and Legos are going to finally start paying dividends for a lucky few.YCombinatoris looking forurban mavericksto address everything from the creation of affordable housing to the design of public spaces in its new research undertaking.

The buzz-word smart-city is rapidly becoming platitudinous but YC will be starting from the unique angle of entrepreneurship.

Building new cities is the ultimate full-stack startup, in both complexity and ambition, and we need a lot of help figuring it out.

— Adora Cheung (@nolimits)June 27, 2016

This is not the first time that YC has mixed existential questions of public service with startup acceleration. The accelerator is also working ona project in Oaklandto explore the repercussions of offering a universal basic income. YC is planning to spend nearly $1.5 million by giving select residents a basic income check. Those who receive money will be tracked next to a control group.

One of YC’s most ambitious goals in its latest project is to challenge itself to fit all necessary municipal regulation within 100 pages. The project will bring goals of increased diversity and civic engagement side by side with data-driven analysis.

At the state level, lawmakers have been working for years to push more data into policy. In 2007, Governor O’Malley of Maryland received attention forhis rollout of StateStat. The program was an effort to instill transparency by more deeply integrating key performance metrics into governance.

Adora Cheung is going to be leading the project. Cheung previously led YCombinator backed Homejoy.Homejoy offered streamlined cleaning servicesbut shutdown after facing legal difficulties in classifying its workers.

The first phase of this will be a YC Research project. This has been a lifelong ambition and I'm excited to form and lead this team.

— Adora Cheung (@nolimits)June 27, 2016

More forthcoming.