The drivers behind digital health apps

There has been an explosion ofdigitalhealthstartups in recent years. The market is expected to reach$233.3 billion by 2020, with the primarydrivercoming from the mobilehealthmarket.

Companies are springing up to offer solutions for theescalating costs ofhealthcare, wellness, physician shortages and the need for improved prevention and management of expensive chronic conditions.

A quick browse of your local Best Buy store will reveal a wide range of fitness trackers and wearablehealthsensors. There also is a selection of “on-demand” scheduling services for thehealthconscious. Now, patients can even access virtual consultation and telemedicine platforms, such asVirtuMedixandeVisit, at their fingertips.

While the high-tech, quick-fix approach may generate substantial buzz in the media, the question remains: Are these really delivering value to the medical ecosystem and improvinghealthoutcomes?

Key investor communities seem to be convinced of the promise of medtech. In 2015,500 Startups announced their first batchto includedigitalhealthstartups, anddigitalhealthcontinued to be one of the central themes of their2016 class. There also is an increasing number of other prestigious accelerator programs for promisingdigitalhealthstartups, includingTechstars, which partners with  the world-renowned hospital system, Cedars-Sinai.

That’s not surprising when you consider that 52 percent of people gatherhealth-related information on their smartphones,according to GreatCall, and mobilehealthand fitness-focusedappsrepresent one of thefastest growing mobileappcategories.

The question is, who is actually using these products? A Nielsen survey noted that half of wearable owners are in the 18-34 age range, and44 percent of people aged 30-39 usehealthapps.

However, as a physician who trained in the heart of Silicon Valley and continues to practice in the nation’s most wellness-obsessed state (California), it seems clear to me that the patients who wear fitness trackers and other wearables are ironically the ones who don’t have any particularhealthneed for the data in the first place — they are often alreadyhealthy.

Perhaps this is whyup to one-third of early adoptersof wearables readily admit that, after a few weeks of use, their tracker devices seem to find their way onto a closet shelf only to collect dust.

A combination of keydriverswill ultimately serve as a market catalyst for consumer adoption and behavior change (in this order):

Financial burden

Prolonged waiting periods

Insurer and provider promotion of technologies

The challenge for the current crop ofdigitalapplications is not only to ensure their services are compelling enough to the general public, but also to make sure they are addressing a real market need.

And it’s essential that they do. According to areport from McKinsey, 31 percent of U.S. healthcare costs of $3 trillion can be attributed to behaviorally influenced chronic conditions. The report goes on to say that unlesshealthsystems find ways to get people to change their behavior,healthcare costs will remain extremely high.

The reality is,appsthat cost a user time, money and inconvenience will fall by the wayside. Those that save on time, money and convenience, however, are far more likely  to stay relevant.

Nevertheless, it’s not enough to provide convenience and ease of access with just a telemedicine consultation and a three-stepapp. Nor is it enough to only have a tracking device gamified to motivate people to walk more steps or climb more stairs. Fitness trackers on their own are extremely unlikely to encourage true behavior change.

Waiting prolonged periods of time to access healthcare providers and procedures is a maindriverfordigitaladoption. Coupled with consumer awareness of howdigitalhealthtechnologies can also be to their financial advantage, we will likely start to see a greater shift in behavior.

Moreover, when medical andhealthprofessionals begin prescribing technology to help develop these potentially life-extending habits, we’ll see further adoption of this technology among patients who really need it. It’s one thing to choose which fun, new technologies to explore, but it’s a very different and compelling scenario when your doctor tells you that it’s going to save your life.

Ultimately, those most successful at consumer adoption will be the ones who can address all of the consumer motivators for change — financial pain and ease of navigation in today’s healthcare system. And among the winners, their products will need to deliver on a value proposition trifecta — convenience, trust and price.

If you have to pay significantly more for being unhealthy or if you are financially incentivized to walk an extra five miles per week, you’ll likely adopt a technology that will help you make the change. If you can’t see a doctor for six weeks because of a physician shortage, you might also be inclined to try a virtual consultation.

Until consumers personally encounter these challenges, it will likely be a waiting game for manydigitalhealthplatforms. A prominent medical device company representative once told me that it is very difficult to get surgeons to change their way of operating and thinking. I agree — but it is even more challenging to get patients to change their behavior.