Get your tickets to the Disrupt London Hackathon now

The very long wait is over, hackathon fans. Disrupt London 2016 is just around the corner, and we’re thrilled to announce the release of the first wave of tickets to the Disrupt London Hackathon.

The Hackathon takes place December 3-4 at London’s beautiful Copper Box Arena, and we hope you’ll join us. Those of you looking to spend the weekend before Disrupt coding and hacking something awesome can get yourfree hackathon tickets here.

The hackathon kicks off at 12:30 p.m. PT on Saturday, December 3, with networking and the forming of the hackathon teams. On Sunday, after a grueling 20 or more hours of hacking and coding, teams will have just 60 seconds to present their projects to a panel of judges on the Disrupt stage.

In addition to the satisfaction that comes with building something from scratch in less than 24 hours, those teams have the opportunity to score a few tickets to Disrupt, a $5,000 grand prize (about £4,000) and several gadgets, toys and other monetary prizes from our sponsors.

Every team that scores a 3 or higher from the judges will win two free tickets to the main Disrupt Conference on December 5-6. At Disrupt, they’ll get to check out the hundreds of startups on Display in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, take in the Startup Battlefield competition, hear from some incredible entrepreneurs and investors in a series of interviews and lectures, and connect with other conference attendees at the various after-parties that take place during the show.

The hackathon is a great place for companies of all verticals.Software company AlexaSitewon the event at Disrupt NY 2016, andhardware company FreeMewon the event at Disrupt London last year.

And it isn’t just small projects that do well at the hackathon. You could very well build the next big thing in just 24 hours. GroupMe, for example, was launched out of the first Disrupt NY Hackathon, andwent on to get acquired by Skype for $80 million.

All you need to bring to the Hackathon is whatever great ideas you may have floating around in your head, and get ready to spend a fun-filled but challenging weekend bringing those ideas to reality. We can’t wait to see what you all come up with.

But first, you’re going to need a ticket. So get on over to our ticketing page today to get your hands on a free Hackathon ticket before they’re gone.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.