Why we don’t believe in tech ‘themes’

Thetechhype-cycle works something like this: Some driver — perhaps a landmark company event such asthe 2014 IPOfor Lending Club in the fintech sector, or the spike in Bitcoin’s value, or indeed Facebook’sacquisitionof Oculus in VR — triggers a flurry of investments in a particular “theme,” which in turn feeds news flow, panel discussions at conferences and a procession of expert “talking heads.”

This febrile atmosphere all too often results in companies that are more noise than substance and an increasingly congested marketplace, which makes it harder for distinctive startups to emerge. As the clamor continues, yet more founders start to pivot their businesses specifically to include the buzzword-of-the-moment (e.g. big data, AI or VR), seemingly no matter how tenuous the link, only to reverse pivot again afterwards when thingsdon’twork out.

From an investor’s point of view, meanwhile, it’s a pretty good rule of thumb that by the time atech“theme” starts to attract buzz, most of the best investments in that sector will have been made.

Granted, in and of itself, hype doesn’tnecessarily mean that a particular company or newtechnologyis good or bad. Nor is it indicative of quality or sound business fundamentals — and it probably won’tincline investors like me to prioritize them. In fact, if anything, I would have a slight negative bias against startups in supposedly “hot” sectors, if for no other reason than the sense of overinflated expectations they carry.

Of course, the later stage at whichweat Highland Europe invest means thatweare inherently skeptical abouttech“themes,”and see them as little more than a layer of branding. Despite our backgrounds intech,we’re not looking for the latest cutting-edgetechcompanies, the startups at the eye of the storm, ifyoulike. Instead,weseek teams that already have a proven business model and revenues — which is whyweset a minimum threshold of €10 million in revenue run rate, and a 50 percent growth rate beforeweinvest.And becausewe’re looking at companies that have real products and customers, whatwethinkabout a particular sector comes a distant second to asking ourselves what it is about a team that is actually working. That enables us to keep an open mind, and leads us to unexpected, almost counter-intuitive places; toward industrieswewouldn’tnecessarily have considered or that wouldn’thave come across our radar ifwe’d been driven bythemesinstead.Wewouldn’thave thought, for example, about investing in arecycling and waste management software companyora fitness equipment and connected servicesfirm.Born entrepreneursThese were companies in sectors about whichwedidn’thave strong convictions, or indeed particular knowledge of. But upon seeing their products, and meeting the passionate founders behind them,weasked ourselves how they fit into the consumer or enterprisetechworlds, and whether they could become very large companies, irrespective of their sector?Techcrunch eventExhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Exhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Berkeley, CA|June 5BOOK NOWBy contrast, with the buzz-led, and I’d argue more cynical, approach, an investor, without prior views on a particular industry, would pounce on a thesis because it sounds on-trend and work backwards from there, searching only for businesses that fit those categories.Take Bitcoin, for example. The digital currency had been around for a while when its price started to soar about two years ago. All of a sudden there was a great deal of excitement, with some commentators gravely declaring Bitcoin to be The Future of Money.Investors scrambled to invest.We, too, looked at a number of companies branded “Bitcoin” — some of which were even profitable enough to have fit our investment criteria. But while thethemewas red-hot,wenever felt thatweunderstood the industry, and its underlying dynamics, well enough to be able to develop a strong opinion, and therefore decided not to invest. (Of course that might change in the future; as I said,wealways try to keep an open mind.)From a founder’s point of view,techthemesoften represent something of a siren song, too. Ifyoudecide to build a startup in a certain area about which there is a great deal of froth, by the timeyouhave created a business model and a minimum viable product,you’ll almost inevitably be a couple of years behind the curve — and that’s ifyoucan beat the competition beforeyouget there.Born entrepreneurs, of course, are far more likely to spot an opportunity that others have overlooked — an industry that’s lagging or a problem that people or businesses need to solve (even if they didn’tknow it). By using that route to starting a company, such founders have a decent shot of being far down the road long before any bandwagons begin to roll.And by the timewecome to invest in their companies, they’ve reached the point in their growth wherethemesare far less relevant anyway. Indeed, the foundersweback aren’tlooking to us for deep expertise inthemeX or Y, but rather for “big picture” help scaling a business, because the issues they face — such as growing a team, adding organizational structure and scaling internationally — are more or less the same, no matter which branch or niche oftechthey happen to be in.

Of course, the later stage at whichweat Highland Europe invest means thatweare inherently skeptical abouttech“themes,”and see them as little more than a layer of branding. Despite our backgrounds intech,we’re not looking for the latest cutting-edgetechcompanies, the startups at the eye of the storm, ifyoulike. Instead,weseek teams that already have a proven business model and revenues — which is whyweset a minimum threshold of €10 million in revenue run rate, and a 50 percent growth rate beforeweinvest.

And becausewe’re looking at companies that have real products and customers, whatwethinkabout a particular sector comes a distant second to asking ourselves what it is about a team that is actually working. That enables us to keep an open mind, and leads us to unexpected, almost counter-intuitive places; toward industrieswewouldn’tnecessarily have considered or that wouldn’thave come across our radar ifwe’d been driven bythemesinstead.Wewouldn’thave thought, for example, about investing in arecycling and waste management software companyora fitness equipment and connected servicesfirm.

These were companies in sectors about whichwedidn’thave strong convictions, or indeed particular knowledge of. But upon seeing their products, and meeting the passionate founders behind them,weasked ourselves how they fit into the consumer or enterprisetechworlds, and whether they could become very large companies, irrespective of their sector?

By contrast, with the buzz-led, and I’d argue more cynical, approach, an investor, without prior views on a particular industry, would pounce on a thesis because it sounds on-trend and work backwards from there, searching only for businesses that fit those categories.

Take Bitcoin, for example. The digital currency had been around for a while when its price started to soar about two years ago. All of a sudden there was a great deal of excitement, with some commentators gravely declaring Bitcoin to be The Future of Money.

Investors scrambled to invest.We, too, looked at a number of companies branded “Bitcoin” — some of which were even profitable enough to have fit our investment criteria. But while thethemewas red-hot,wenever felt thatweunderstood the industry, and its underlying dynamics, well enough to be able to develop a strong opinion, and therefore decided not to invest. (Of course that might change in the future; as I said,wealways try to keep an open mind.)From a founder’s point of view,techthemesoften represent something of a siren song, too. Ifyoudecide to build a startup in a certain area about which there is a great deal of froth, by the timeyouhave created a business model and a minimum viable product,you’ll almost inevitably be a couple of years behind the curve — and that’s ifyoucan beat the competition beforeyouget there.Born entrepreneurs, of course, are far more likely to spot an opportunity that others have overlooked — an industry that’s lagging or a problem that people or businesses need to solve (even if they didn’tknow it). By using that route to starting a company, such founders have a decent shot of being far down the road long before any bandwagons begin to roll.And by the timewecome to invest in their companies, they’ve reached the point in their growth wherethemesare far less relevant anyway. Indeed, the foundersweback aren’tlooking to us for deep expertise inthemeX or Y, but rather for “big picture” help scaling a business, because the issues they face — such as growing a team, adding organizational structure and scaling internationally — are more or less the same, no matter which branch or niche oftechthey happen to be in.

Investors scrambled to invest.We, too, looked at a number of companies branded “Bitcoin” — some of which were even profitable enough to have fit our investment criteria. But while thethemewas red-hot,wenever felt thatweunderstood the industry, and its underlying dynamics, well enough to be able to develop a strong opinion, and therefore decided not to invest. (Of course that might change in the future; as I said,wealways try to keep an open mind.)

From a founder’s point of view,techthemesoften represent something of a siren song, too. Ifyoudecide to build a startup in a certain area about which there is a great deal of froth, by the timeyouhave created a business model and a minimum viable product,you’ll almost inevitably be a couple of years behind the curve — and that’s ifyoucan beat the competition beforeyouget there.

Born entrepreneurs, of course, are far more likely to spot an opportunity that others have overlooked — an industry that’s lagging or a problem that people or businesses need to solve (even if they didn’tknow it). By using that route to starting a company, such founders have a decent shot of being far down the road long before any bandwagons begin to roll.

And by the timewecome to invest in their companies, they’ve reached the point in their growth wherethemesare far less relevant anyway. Indeed, the foundersweback aren’tlooking to us for deep expertise inthemeX or Y, but rather for “big picture” help scaling a business, because the issues they face — such as growing a team, adding organizational structure and scaling internationally — are more or less the same, no matter which branch or niche oftechthey happen to be in.