Meditation startup Simple Habit adds Android, web app

Mindfulness appSimple Habithas expanded its reach, launching anAndroid versionand also adding aweb appto widen the touchpoints for what the team is hoping to build into a platform for guided meditation — touting their Spotify style subscription model as a first for the mindfulness space.

The iOS version of the app exited beta inJune, when it had around 10,000 users.

Simple Habit’s initial pitch focused on a selection of free five minute guided meditations — aiming to appeal to busy professionals who might not feel they can afford to take 20 minutes or half an hour out of their day. But it’s not limiting content on the platform to only bite-sized meditations.

Founder Yunha Kim says the app now has around 40,000 monthly active users, and a total of 120,000 downloads. Users from across 115 countries are clocking up more than 20,000 hours of meditation at this point, according to Kim.

“We’ve been growing consistently at six to eight per cent week over week,” she says.

Not all iOS users are paying users though, given the app offers free guided meditations as well as the ability to subscribe to access premium content.

At this point Simple Habit’s platform has around 50 teachers signed up to create guided mediation content for its users.

“We have over 100 free meditation sessions available on the app, so many of our users can start meditating without subscribing. However, a good chunk of our users end up subscribing to get access to premium content like before meeting, meditation for engineers, and meditations for entrepreneurs,” says Kim.

“We want to be the leading consumer brand for mindfulness,” she adds. “We’re building a world where people meditate on daily basis, just like running or brushing their teeth. 50 years ago, people didn’t run or brush their teeth on daily basis — it was toothpaste companies and lifestyle companies like Nike who made that happen. We want to do the same for mindfulness.”

Users of the Android and web app are getting first access to a new lifetime subscription plan Simple Habit is introducing, alongside extant monthly and yearly options. Kim says they’re adding the lifetime option “by popular request”.

Android users are also being offered discount subscription rates at launch — of $9.99 monthly, $69.99 yearly, or $299.99 for the lifetime plan.