Tickets to Startup and Hardware Alley at Disrupt London 2016 are now available

Listen up, startups in the U.K. and around the world.Disrupt London 2016is right around the corner, and we’re happy to announce that tickets to display your company in Startup and Hardware alley are now available.

You can get your hands on Startup and Hardware Alley ticketshere.

For just £800, you’ll get two tickets to display your company in Startup Alley on Monday, December 5. Or for £650, you can partake in either Startup Alley or Hardware Alley on Tuesday, December 6.

That price gets you two general admission passes to the Disrupt conference, which you’ll be able to use to attend all of the interviews and fireside chats with our amazing lineup of speakers on the day you’re not in the Alley. You’ll also, of course, get to peruse the show floor and chat with the dozens of startups in the Alley that day, and check out the early-stage startups competing in the Startup Battlefield.

And, of course, you’ll get to attend all the wonderful parties and after-parties that take place the week of Disrupt, so you can keep the good times going long into the evening after the show floor closes for the day.

All Startup Alley companies must be less than two years old and have secured less than US$2 million in funding.

We’d especially like to invite all you international startup organizations to apply for a country pavilion in Startup Alley at Disrupt, one of our favorite Startup Alley staples in recent years. Over the past several Disrupt shows, we’ve featured promising startups from all corners of the world — places like Ireland, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea and the Middle East.

As long as you meet the criteria identified above,drop our events team an emailwith details about your organization and what country your startup is from. After reviewing your submission, we’ll reach out with additional information about how to secure your spot in the Alley.

The Startup Alley at Disrupt is one of the best ways to get your company noticed by tech enthusiasts who could turn into top employees, members of the press who can get your company the coverage it needs and investors who could bring the funding to take your startup to the next level.

We hope you and your companies will join us at Disrupt London 2016, which takes place December 5-6 at London’s Copper Box Arena.