Citymapper founder Azmat Yusuf to join us at TechCrunch Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

We’re excited to announce that Azmat Yusuf, the founder of the incredibly usefulCitymapperurban transit app, will be joining us onstage atTechCrunch Disrupt in Londonon December 5-6.

Yusuf previously worked at Google, as well as in the venture capital and equities fields for international banks. He started the Citymapper app in 2011, originally as a guide for Londoners to navigate the city’s bus network. As the saying goes, once he’d proved there was a need he ran with it, and now Citymapper covers many global cities, and recently launched in Moscow. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania with a degree in both Electrical Engineering and Economics and received his MBA from INSEAD in 2009.

Despite the enormous success of Citymapper, which has gone on to raise $50 million, Yusuf is a rare public speaker, so we’re looking forward to hearing about his thoughts on the future of transportation and smart cities.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield, where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

Apply with your new startup for Battlefield for free here. There’s also theStartup Battlefield Scholarship Fundfor startups who have not raised funding! The Startup Battlefield application deadline has now been extended. If Battlefield isn’t for you and you want to display your company, then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card, to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.