Tech companies and the global rise of e-sports

The latest sports phenomenon sweeping the globe wasn’t represented at theOlympic Gamesin Rio; it doesn’t require an intense physical training regimen or even traditional sports equipment. We’re talking aboute-sports —competitive video gaming — and the opportunities for huge windfalls for players and advertisers are immense. Corporations plan to spend$325 millionon sponsorships and marketing ofe-sportsthis year, hoping to reach gaming’s huge millennial demographic as the sport goes viral.

The idea of publicizing video game competitions is nothing new. In 1972, Stanford University invited students to an “Intergalactic Spacewar Olympics” for the game Spacewar. The prize? A year’s subscription to Rolling Stone magazine. These days, prize pools for major competitions, like Call of Duty, are at least in the six-figure range, and crowdfunded prize pools boost those paychecks into the millions.

Beyond advertisers and gamers, the real money up for grabs here is for thetechcompaniesthat can successfully bring these competitions to a worldwide audience in a mainstream media format. With the industry projected to generate more than$1.9 billion in revenue by 2018, there are various risingtechplayers to watch as this fierce competition heats up.

Recently emerged from stealth mode, startupGenvid Technologieshas the lofty goal of creating “revolutionaryeSportsbroadcasts.” By bringing interactive elements and multiple camera angles into live-streamed games, co-founder Jacob Navok hopes to hook a whole new audience with more compelling broadcasts and greater opportunities to monetize competitions.

The challenge is that video games are built with players, rather than spectators, in mind. Genvid hopes to solve this problem by enabling developers to control camera angles during live-streamed games as if they were in the editing booth at major sporting events. This would create a more compelling narrative with built-in storytelling and emotion — something that would be appealing to sponsors, advertisers and viewers.

Genvid hopes to challenge Twitch, the leading streaming platform fore-sports, which has a staggering 45 million monthly viewers. Twitch’s single-camera perspective, Novak says, is like “watching a Major League Baseball game from the viewpoint of a GoPro camera strapped to a player’s back.” It’s pretty easy to see the huge potential for profit if Genvid is successful with its current free demo phase and upcoming beta tests withe-sportscompanies.

ESPN performed some unexpectedly successful beta testing of its own last June when it became the first sports magazine to dedicate an entire issue toe-sports. One of the issue’s featured stories on a top gamer received more than 1.1 million page views on ESPN.com. Realizing professional coverage of this burgeoning arena would have ahuge instant audience, ESPN launched a dedicatede-sportsvertical this year. ESPN2 even televised an entire live competition calledHeroes of the Dormlast year. We can expect to see the sports juggernaut roll out even more coverage ofe-sportsin coming months.

We can’t have a conversation aboute-sportswithout discussing its mobile applications. An app that improves the players, not the game? Germany’s got that. Technology is making it even easier for aspiring players looking to cash in on the huge prizes available to top gamers withDojo Madness, a Berlin-based startup with plans to turn gamers’ smartphones into ane-sportscoach. Through advances that combine machine learning with in-play data, Dojo Madness has created a coaching app that raised $4.5 million in its first round of funding. Initially targetingLeague of Legends, the app offers strategy before and during the game, and analyzes performance in a post-game recap.

This second-screen technology will be huge in the age of big data. League of Legends, among other games, offers open APIs, enablinge-sportscompaniesto pull in gameplay data, which in turn makes in-game coaching possible. The company’s League of Legends app, called LOLSumo, is already the top app for this game, with more than half a million downloads.

Another big playercapitalizingin thee-sportsarea isActivision, a company hoping to “activize” more cash in their cache. Earlier this year, in a$46 million deal, Activision Blizzard acquired Major League Gaming, an early organizer ofe-sportscompetitions. Valued at $27 billion, Activision is already a leader in the industry as the publisher of leading franchises, such as Call of Duty, but this move signals that they want more than the game — Activision wants to dominate the entire arena ofe-sports.

According to chief executiveRobert Kotick, Activision hopes to create “the ESPN ofeSports” by bringing mainstream viewing away from the internet and onto traditional cable TV channels. This could be tough competition, as ESPN still intends to be the ESPN ofe-sports —may the best company win!

Kotick hopes to tap into an even bigger audience than the online community by bolstering televised broadcasts with the same kind of coverage that traditional sports receive. In the spirit of the Games, Activision and Genvid Technologies should play on the same team instead of as opponents.

The budding startups, bigtechcompaniesand TV channels planning to capitalize one-sportsare just the beginning of the sport’sglobalrise. TheInternationale-SportsFederation(IeSF) even took steps to berecognized by the Olympic Committeein February, and was provided the necessary route to become an official sport in April. Indeed,e-sportscould be on the Olympic stage before we know it — but until then, there will be no shortage of players getting their heads and wallets in the game.