How to live stream the Democratic National Convention

The Democratic National Convention kicks off this week in Philadelphia, in the wake of the GOP convention and amassive leakof Democratic National Committee emails that’s been widely attributed toRussian hackers. It should be an interesting event, and not just because of all the DNC drama in the news this week — there’s a lineup of heavy-hitting speakers and panels as well.

The DNC runs today through Thursday. Here are all the different ways to watch:

Twitch live streamed the Republican National Convention last week and it’s streaming the DNC too. This is Twitch’s first foray into streaming political events, and the company is using automation and live moderators to keep the comments appropriate.

Unlike several other live streams, Twitch isn’t partnering with a major news network, so theTwitch streamwill only feature the convention events themselves, with no news anchor filler in between. Twitch users can also re-broadcast the stream on their own channels and provide commentary.

This is when the Twitch stream is scheduled to start each day:

12 p.m. PTon Monday, July 251 p.m. PTonTuesday, July 261:30 p.m. PTonWednesday, July 271:30 p.m. PTonThursday, July 28

Twitter is partnering with CBS for itslive stream, and users can add their commentary to the discussion using the hashtags #DemsInPhilly and #DemConvention. The CBS partnership means that Twitter will have constant coverage over the course of the week. Twitter’s stream kicks off at 4 p.m. ET today.

Like Twitter, Facebook teamed up with a news network for its live coverage. ABC is Facebook’s official partner for the primetime portion of DNC, which includes the keynote speakers and kicks off around 4 p.m. ET every day.

Several other news organizations are streaming video on Facebook as well, including Fox News, C-SPAN, PBS, and others.

There’s not as much opportunity for direct interaction onABC’s Facebook live stream, but ABC reporters will take some questions from viewers via Facebook Live. Other outlets will also be taking questions and streaming from Facebook’s Live Lounge at the DNC.

YouTube is theofficial live streamoutlet for the DNC and the RNC. Comments were disabled on the RNC live stream last week, so if you’re looking to add your two cents to the conversation, YouTube might not be the place to watch (although comments on the DNC live stream are currently active, they’re a bit of a mess and will probably get shut off, just like the RNC comments did). However, YouTube is promising special 360-degree video, so viewers will get fresh perspectives on the convention.

Each day of the DNC is themed: Today is “United Together,” Tuesday is “A Lifetime of Fighting for Children and Families,” Wednesday is “Working Together,” and Thursday is “Stronger Together.”

The festivities kick off at 4 p.m. ET/1 p.m. PT, and the two main speakers to watch today are Sen. Bernie Sanders and First Lady Michelle Obama.

Tuesday’s lineup starts at 4 p.m. ET/1 p.m. PT. The keynote speaker is Bill Clinton, but there will also be an interesting lineup of speakers from Mothers of the Movement, an organization of mothers of black men and women killed by police, including Eric Garner, Trayvon Martin, and Sandra Bland.

Wednesday’s primetime speakers begin at 4:30 p.m. ET/1:30 p.m. PT and include several family members of victims of gun violence. The evening’s keynote speakers are Vice President Joe Biden and President Barack Obama.

The DNC will wrap up Thursday at 4:30 p.m. ET/1:30 p.m. PT with speeches from Chelsea Clinton and Hillary Clinton. While Trump closed his convention with speeches from some of his biggest celebrity friends, includingPeter Thiel, Clinton is going a different direction. Aside from her daughter, most of her primetime speakers on Thursday are average Americans.

Several high-profile Democrats are also rumored to be speaking at the convention, although they’re not on theofficial DNC schedule: Michael Bloomberg, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, Sen Barbara Boxer, California Governor Jerry Brown, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, Sen. Al Franken, Rep. Nancy Pelosi, and others.