Samsung confirms ‘adjusting’ Note 7 production in wake of new incidents

This is probably about as close to a full confirmation oflast night’s reportingthat Samsung has temporarily halting production of the Galaxy Note 7. In another cautiously worded statement issued this morning, the hardware maker told TechCrunch,

We are temporarily adjusting the Galaxy Note7 production schedule in order to take further steps to ensure quality and safety matters.

The company hasn’t gone so far as using a word like “halt” or “suspend” akin to what we saw with last night’s reporting, which included word from supply officers, but it does confirm that the company is taking another big step in what has become a month-plus PR nightmare for what was supposed to be Samsung’s next major hardware play.

The move comes in the wake of multiple new reports of replacement Galaxy Notes malfunctioning, a chain events kicked off on Thursday when a Southwest flight was forced to evacuate at the gate after a passenger’s device began smoking. A handful of new reports followed,culminating with announcementsthat AT&T, T-Mobile and Verizon would halt sales of the problematic product.

Samsung has since issued a follow up statement, addressing the move by carriers who had previously announced that they would trade in the devices. The company both acknowledged the action, while downplaying the number of incidents.

“We recognize that carrier partners have stopped sales and exchanges of the Galaxy Note7 in response to reports of heat damage issues, and we respect their decision,” Samsung said in its comment. “We are working diligently with authorities and third party experts and will share findings when we have completed the investigation. Even though there are a limited number of reports, we want to reassure customers that we are taking every report seriously. If we determine a product safety issue exists, Samsung will take immediate steps approved by the CPSC to resolve the situation.”

U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission has been involved with the issue for some time, officially recalling the Galaxy Note 7 mid-last month. The government arm has also been heavily involved with this latest round of reports, which have spanned a number of states, but has yet to issue an official recall.

More news to come soon surely.