The ethics of transhumanism

When I was growing up, my father often told me that Andy Warhol once said that he wanted to be a machine, and that it would be a lot easier to be a machine — if something broke, you could just replace it.

Even though small wounds and injuries heal, this has not beenthecase for humans. If something were inherently broken, it would stay brokentherestofour lives. Which relates to another common saying: Theonly two things in this world that are certain are death and taxes.

Forthetranshumanistmovement, this is notthecase.Transhumanistsbelieve that humankind can evolve beyond its current physical and mental limitations to become “superhuman” and, eventually, immortal. Oneofthemost prominent membersofthemovement is Zoltan Istvan, founderoftheTranshumanistParty and2016 third-party presidential candidate.

For Istvan, aging and death are the biggest plague of our time. The party is proposing a transhumanist bill of rights that states that it should be illegal to stop research on longevity and eternal rights based on religious and ethical reasons.

Manyoftoday’s well-known faces inthetech world accompanythemovement. Peter Thiel has, like a modern-dayKing Gilgamesh,stated that it isagainst human nature not to fight death, and is investing heavily in companies liketheMethuselah Foundation. Heis joined by Larry Ellison, who findsaccepting mortality “incomprehensible.”Google co-foundersLarry Page and Sergey Brin, as well as Mark Zuckerberg,are also investing in ways to extend human life.

Theconceptofeternal or even extended life would challenge several constructsoftoday’s society, ranging from healthcare and social services to pensions and insurance, as well asthelabor market, just to name a few. Eternal life also poses a seriesofethicaland moral dilemmas, such as how to make room forthenext generation, or whether eternal or prolonged life would be reserved for those privileged few.

Oneoftheproposed solutions to achieve immortality comes from Ray Kurzweil, who believes that we can transfer our consciousness to machinesto achieve digital immortalitywithin three decades.

However, bythetime it is predicted we achieve digital immortality, it is also likely that we would havedeveloped human-like artificial intelligence. Elon Musk believes that humans need to adddigital implants intheformofa neural laceto their brains to be able to compete with artificial intelligence.

For those who wish to start with something simpler than brain implants, you canorder a DIY kit to implant RFID or NFC chipsin your hand.Thefounderofthesite has completely stopped using keys and passwords, and states that implants like these should be considered a natural next stepofhuman evolution. Earlier this year Andreas Sjöström got some attention through aYouTube video, showing how he boarded a flightby tapping his left hand on an NFC reader.

While implants are one formofaugmentation forthetranshumanage, prosthetics are becoming more advanced and there are already projects in development that enable limbs to becontrolled bythemind and linked directly tothenervous system.

Advances in3D printing are also enteringtheworldofprostheticsand organ transplants. We will soon be able to createcustom replacement partsfor both limbs and organs. Imagine a future where you will be able to replace different limbs to suit different tasks, with bionic body parts specifically engineered to perform specialized tasks much better than our own arms and legs that are generally good at most things.

There are even those who claim that in atranshumanworld,thedisabled will betheones without prosthetic limbsor other formsofbionic enhancements. This opens up anotherethicaldebate.When is it OK to replace healthy human limbswith artificial (and inthefuture, superior) ones?

For those who prefer to stay biological, but still look to enhance performance, biohacking is another field withinthetranshumanistmovement. For $199, you can get your DNA analyzed bythecompany23andMeto test various health conditions based on genetic and hereditary conditions. Researchers are even browsing DNA data to look forclues that let us understand depression.Themost well-known initiative in this field istheHuman Genome Project, which fromthevery beginning foresaw thathuman genomic researchwould raiseethical, legal and social issues. Indeed,there are alreadycasesofgenetic discriminationintheinsurance industry.

However, understanding genetics is onlythefirst step. CRISPR is a technology that allows scientists to edit genomes withunprecedented precision, efficiency and flexibility.Chinese scientists will becomethefirst intheworld to inject people with cells modifiedusing gene-editing technology CRISPR Cas9 in anattempt to cure cancer.

Genome editingraises some complex issues, and critics warn aboutthesocial dangersofcreating genetically modified humans, and also state that gene editing challengestheviewofwhat it means to be human.

Whether superhuman performance, longevity or even immortality is achieved through ridding ourselvesofour biological body, augmentations or biohacking, an important question arises:Who gets to betranshuman?Will this create a new class divide, where an elite class emerges through both physical and mental upgrades? A robotic heart for instance,currently costs around $200,000.

While manyoftheideasoftranshumanismare noble,thefield is accusedofsharing traits with eugenics. I am not even going to try to answerthemanyethical, moral and existential questions raised bytranshumanism.Theonly thing I know is that it is inevitable that advances in robotics, bionics, artificial intelligence and genetics will affectthenext phaseofhuman evolution, and we should not underestimatetheethicaland social implications.