In school or a recent grad? Get your cheap student tickets to Disrupt SF now

Are you an undergraduate or graduate student looking to attend the best startup show in San Francisco? Student tickets toDisrupt SF 2016are still available at the deeply discounted rate of just $300.

These tickets were previously only available to students currently enrolled in school, but we’re now expanding their availability to all of the recent graduates out there. If you graduated in May or June of 2016, you can now get in on the cheap Disrupt ticket action.

To take advantage of this opportunity, all you’ll need to do is send an email tostudents@beta.techcrunch.com. Current students should send a copy of their valid student identification card and transcripts that show their current enrollment status. Recent grads should send their student IDs, transcripts and confirmation of graduation. Once we’ve confirmed your status, we’ll send you information on how to purchase your student tickets to Disrupt.

Disrupt is a great way for students and recent grads to make connections with key figures in the tech industry, connections that could help lead you to your next major career opportunity. You’ll get to connect with some of the most influential minds in the tech community, from venture capitalists to entrepreneurs and, of course, your favorite TechCrunch writers and editors.

And if that isn’t enough to pique your interest, you’ll also get to check out some of the awesome startups pitching their wares to attendees in the Startup and Hardware Alleys, check out the Startup Battlefield competition, and listen to top investors, innovators and entrepreneurs in the dozens of interviews and fireside chats we have lined up for the show.

And, you can keep the networking going long into the night with all of the after-parties we have planned.

Disrupt SF takes place September 12-14 at Pier 48 in San Francisco. We hope to see you there.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.