Gett founder and CEO Shahar Waiser joins TechCrunch Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! One month to go! It will betheplace to come talk about new technology, your startup, other startups, everyone’s startups! Grab ticketshere.So many speakershave already been announced. But, yes, there are even more to come. Today we’re delighted to say Shahar Waiser, founder ofGett, is also joining.

Gett founder & CEO Shahar Waiser is a serial entrepreneur who’s founded and built companies in the U.S. and internationally. In early 2000, Shahar founded the Russian entity of publicly traded Comverse [CMVT] and served as its first CEO with $300M record in total sales. After moving to Silicon Valley in 2005, Shahar founded and then sold Loyalize, a social engagement & loyalty startup based in San Francisco (acquired by Viggle [VGGL]). In 2011 Shahar founded Gett, which has since raised over $520 million in venture funding and was selected by Forbes as one of the “top 15 explosively growing companies.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your tickets at this priceuntil Nov. 4.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.