Only a few more weeks to save £400 on Disrupt London tickets

San Franciscomay be up next, but we at TechCrunch are already getting ready for Europe. Disrupt London 2016 is only a few short months away, and one deadline you definitely won’t want to miss is already fast approaching.

September 16th is the final day to get extra early-bird tickets to Disrupt London for just £800 apiece, a full £400 off the final price of £1,200. Or, you can sign up with a co-worker and you can save an additional £100 off each ticket with our multi-ticket (2+) discount. Your choice.

You can get your extra early-bird Disrupt ticketshere.

So what can you do with that ticket? First, you’ll get to attend a series of lectures and interviews with  a truly incredible lineup of entrepreneurs, investors and innovators. We’re not ready to announce this year’s speakers just yet, but past speakers have included the likes of footballer Thierry Henry, Passion Capital Partner Eileen Burbidge, and retired Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson, to name just a few.

Then, you’ll walk the Disrupt show floor as you chat with founders and other representatives of some of the top early-stage startups in the UK and around the world. Next, you’ll check out the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, where a dozen or so promising early-stage startups pitch our panel of judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup and a £30,000 grand prize.

Finally, after a long day of fun, what better way to unwind than by attending the after-parties that keep the good times going long after the show floor closes up for the night?

Of course, you can’t do any of it if you don’t have a ticket, and the best way to get a ticket is by getting an early bird ticket for just £800 now before the price increases on September 16.

Disrupt London 2016 takes place December 5-6 at London’sbeautiful Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.