Samantha Payne of Open Bionics’ 3D prosthetics to speak at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! Not long now! Come talk about new technology, your startup, raising money and the future. Grab ticketshere. Amongst the many speakers already announced, today we’re delighted to say Samantha Payne Co-Founder and COO ofOpen Bionicswhich recently unveiled the ability to download and 3D print-off limbs by open sourcing their designs.

Samantha co-founded Open Bionics, an award-winning robotics company that is changing the face of the prosthetics industry. Samantha’s startup is developing bionic hands in the style of superheroes, enabling young amputees to become their favourite characters, just like Iron Man!

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your tickets at this priceuntil 4 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.