Next round of Disrupt London Hackathon tickets now available

Disrupt London 2016is fast approaching, and soon thousands of the best and brightest entrepreneurs and tech enthusiasts will make their way to London’s Copper Box Arena in the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park for the best startup show in Europe.

One of our favorite parts of Disrupt actually takes place before the show floor opens up for the week — the Disrupt Hackathon. Today, we’re happy to announce that the next batch of tickets to the hackathon is now available, so if you want to spend a fun-filled week building the next great app, product or service, be sure to get your completely free hackathon ticket now.

You can get those ticketshere.

The hackathon kicks off at 12:30 p.m. PT on Saturday, December 3, with networking and the forming of the hackathon teams. On Sunday, after a grueling 20 or more hours of hacking and coding, teams will have just 60 seconds to present their projects to a panel of judges on the Disrupt stage.

In addition to building something awesome, teams have the chance to win tickets to the main Disrupt conference, a $5,000 (about £4,000) grand prize and several toys, gadgets and other monetary prizes from our hackathon sponsors.

Each team that achieves a score of 3 or higher from our panel of judges will win two free tickets to Disrupt, which takes place December 5-6 at the same location. While at Disrupt, you’ll get to watch companies compete in the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, chat with founders of hundreds of startups in Startup and Hardware Alley and hear from some of the more brilliant minds in the business with the many interviews and lectures that take place throughout the show.

Plus, you’ll get to attend the parties and after-parties that will let you keep the good times and networking going long after the show floor closes up for the night.

The hackathon is a great place for companies of all verticals.Software company AlexaSitewon the event at Disrupt NY 2016, andhardware company FreeMewon the event at Disrupt London last year, for example.

And it isn’t just small projects that do well at the hackathon. You could very well build the next big thing in just 24 hours. GroupMe, for example, was launched out of the first Disrupt NY Hackathon, andwent on to get acquired by Skype for $80 million.

All you need to bring to the hackathon is whatever great ideas you may have floating around in your head, and get ready to spend a challenging, fun-filled weekend bringing those ideas to reality. We can’t wait to see what you all come up with.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.