How Drake can help you understand your business

The startup world is full of crazy metrics, monolithic frameworks and over-engineered tools — all claiming to measure the impact of everything. It’s getting tiring; and frankly, a lot of these theories are too far from reality to be useful.

As a founder or someone working in a startup, the main priority is always staying alive. Every ounce ofyourbudget needs to be spent efficiently. Shouldyouinvest in paid advertising? Hire an intern? Take that trip to San Francisco that could make or break thebusiness?

It’s all about difficult decisions, and some of themcanbe messy and complex. With options coming from every angle,youneed to find ways to make them as simple as possible. This is the only wayyoucanbringyourfocus back to how they will impact thebusiness. That’s the most important thing. How doyouprioritize? How doyousay no?

This is where our good friendDrakecomes in.

I’ve got to admit, I’m actually talking aboutFrankDrake, the man who came up with theDrakeequationin 1961. He hosted what was essentially a meetup for astrophysicists and, asyouwould, started asking people how great it would be to estimate how much life there was in the galaxy.

Obviously an insanely complex thing to be discussing in a meetup. But that didn’t stop him.

Drakestarted writing an agenda listing all the variables and topics they needed to discuss to try to approach this question logically.

Eventually, he got every variable he could think of down. Using it, he created a complex equation on a single piece of paper able to estimate how much life there was in the universe:

Read how it works

Draketook something incredibly complex and broke it down into something easy tounderstand.  This got me thinking — couldyouapplyDrake’s teachings to the messy and complex startup world?

I thought I’d give it a go.

Let’s take something like e-commerce as a simple example. Think about howyoudefine growth in an e-commercebusiness. Which different variables doyouhave? Here’s the list I came up with:

Bring these variables together in a logical way andyouget something like this:

Growth = Product Inventory x Traffic x Conversion x Average Basket Size x Repeat Purchases

Thereyouhave it. Now ifyouwant to explain an e-commercebusinesstoyourmother,youcould. Obviously she probably wouldn’t be interested, but the same applies for investors.

You’ve probably experienced quirky questions like “What’syourquick ratio?” or “What’syourSaaS Magic number?” These are all stats that inform VCs’ own equations thathelpthem uncover the diamonds in the rough.

Talking to investors in this way helps them see thatyouunderstandwhat levelyouneed to work at to build a successfulbusiness. The same applies when hiring staff; these equationshelpyoubring clarity to thebusinessand ensure everyone understands their roles and how it makes everything simple.

Let’s take another example, like sales, which I had no idea about six months ago (so ifyou’re in the same boat, don’t despair). Someone came up with this direct equation called sales velocity:

Sales Velocity = Work In Progress x Win Rate x Avg. Deal Size ÷ Time Taken To Close

Suddenly, knowing nothing about sales, but still managing salespeople, doesn’t seem like such a daunting task.Youcanunderstandhow well they are doing and where they need to focus by asking three simple questions:

Instantlyyoucansee how this equation helpsyouidentify top performers; but it also helps individuals see where theycanincrementally improve — whether they need to focus on closing more quickly, finding better qualified leads or targeting higher-value leads.

Drake’s teachings are incredibly useful whenyouneed to bring order to chaos. And the applications go far further than the examples I’ve shared here.

Using this theory,youcantrack performance ofyourbusiness andrationalize decisions; it’s even a great way to explainyourbusinessinternally and externally — use it to showyou’re in full control without overwhelming anyone.

In a world full of Kissmetrics, Mixpanel, Moz and Mint, we often suffer from information overload, which leads to action paralysis. What’s important aboutDrake’s approach is it allowsyouto only track what matters. And asyousee what doesn’t work, or isn’t impactingyourbusiness,youcanstop measuring it.

Now thatyouknow about the originalDrake,you’ll start seeing yourself applying these equations everywhere, from informing teams to giving investors an overview ofyourbusiness.

So what areyouwaiting for? Put onyourheadphones, get out a notepad,play thisand start simplifying.