Steve Hilton, Crowdpac founder and Brexit advocate, joins Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in London is on 5-6 December. Think 3,000 crazy startup founders and investors talking for two solid days. And not to mention the hackathon on the weekend before! We’ve already announced many great speakers and we’re glad to say Steve Hilton is joining. He’s not just the co-founder and CEO of Silicon Valley political crowdfunding and data start-up Crowdpac — he’s a former advisor to the previous British Prime Minister, David Cameron, and was a vociferous advocate of the UK leaving the European Union. We’re sure he’ll have a lot to say about that, as the UK and the EU try to define their future relationship.

He also teaches at Stanford University’s Institute of Design (d.school), and is the author of the Sunday Times bestsellerMore Human – Designing a World Where People Come First.

Steve was previously Senior Advisor to UK Prime Minister David Cameron, where he helped lead the implementation of the British government’s domestic reform program. Prior to the 2010 General Election, as David Cameron’s head of strategy, Steve is credited with helping to develop the ideas associated with the modernization of the British Conservative Party.

Before working in politics, Steve was co-founder of Good Business, a corporate responsibility consulting firm, and The Good Cook, an award-wining London restaurant. He lives in the San Francisco Bay Area with his wife and young family. And 12 chickens!

The two-day Disrupt conference runs 5-6 December in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

Apply with your new startup for Battlefield for free here. There’s also theStartup Battlefield Scholarship Fundfor startups who have not raised funding. The Startup Battlefield application deadline has been extended. If Battlefield isn’t for you and you want to display your company then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Early bird tickets are now available for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your tickets at this price until 4 Novemberwhen they rise to £1200.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.