Powering the golden age of audio

Audio,thespoken word, is humanity’s primary means of sentient communication:thesounds a fetus hears in utero; a lover’s whisper; a marriage proposal… all leave deep imprints on our hearts and minds. We use sound to accentuate and transmit our emotions; our aural ability is a primary sense that is deeply connected to emotion.

In fact, much research indicates that hearing isthemost important ofthefive senses. We detect harmful and dangerous sounds with our ears — if a fire alarm rings inthemiddle ofthenight, we depend on our hearing to alert us of impending danger. While historically sight has beenthemost valued sense,audiohas been catching up.

Asthetechnological era dawned,audioenjoyed a heyday. Thomas Edison’s phonograph, Guglielmo Marconi’s invention oftheradio and Orson Welles’ successfuldramatizationof “TheWar oftheWorlds,” in what would essentially becometheworld’s first popular podcast, all left their imprint on history.

But while public programming enjoyed an auditory renaissance inthetwentieth century,audiowas losing out to an antiquated rival in our day-to-day lives. For generations, humanity’s primary means of communication across distance wasthewritten word: a shortcoming so critical that technology needed to be invented to fillthegap forthespoken word. Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press andtheQWERTY keyboard in many senses actually backtracked our progress by prioritizing visual technologies over auditory ones.

Stumbling and slowly, telephony led to research into speech recognition and voice-activated commands.Bell Labs,DARPAand lesser-known academics likeRaj Reddy,Leonard Baumand others pioneeredtheway. IBM and, more recently, Google picked upthegauntlet along with others, andthetechnology is now surging forward. Inthedomestic arena, we see Amazon’s Echo freeing our fingers fromthekeyboard. Steve Jobs hatedthestylus, aptly noting we’re equipped with 10 similarly shaped devices — and accordingly, auditory technology has surged forward.

Now we can express our desires without a keyboard and receive responses without a screen: an all-inclusive ability to verbally roam, hands-free, within our homes, offices and cars, at no extra cost. Siri, Cortana and Genie are fully equipped to program our lives withouttheneed to touch a single key, handling scheduling, phone calls and research with athetap ofthehome button.Senses drivingthehere and nowAudiotechnology has allowed us to return to a seamless way of communicating. Gone are keystroke text messages in favor of short pre-recordedaudionotes. We initiate dialogue with Siri, Cortana and Google Now, receiving witty comebacks in a conscious back-and-forth volley between humans and artificial intelligence.Techcrunch eventExhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Exhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Berkeley, CA|June 5BOOK NOWThese personal assistants are expanding their set of programmed responses; for proof, just ask Siri if she beatboxes — trust me. It is not too far-fetched to believethefuture ofaudiowill help streamline tasks via voice commands and allow us a more seamless, elegant way of communicating.As it was intheeras of Gutenberg, Edison and Marconi,thetechnology is incipient and rudimentary, yet it’s rapidly improving.Theinternet brought a world of information to our fingertips, andtheIoT is wiring it all together. Imagine locatingthelatest sportscaster predictions fortheevening’s Red Sox/Rangers match-up, which Siri finds for me.Onthehorizon, programs like Alexa will ask how we like our morning coffee or offer a nudge when we run out of milk. Maybe Amazon Echo will read sections of our favorite publications, and provide route instructions for daily commutes based on up-to-date traffic patterns. Treadmills will nag us to get off our respective couches to exercise, portraying a boisterous personal trainer who keeps track of our calorie intake.Just as we entertheworld fully cognizant of our primary senses, soon they will becometheprimary means of how we communicate — both interpersonally and via technology — throughout our lives.

Now we can express our desires without a keyboard and receive responses without a screen: an all-inclusive ability to verbally roam, hands-free, within our homes, offices and cars, at no extra cost. Siri, Cortana and Genie are fully equipped to program our lives withouttheneed to touch a single key, handling scheduling, phone calls and research with athetap ofthehome button.

Audiotechnology has allowed us to return to a seamless way of communicating. Gone are keystroke text messages in favor of short pre-recordedaudionotes. We initiate dialogue with Siri, Cortana and Google Now, receiving witty comebacks in a conscious back-and-forth volley between humans and artificial intelligence.

These personal assistants are expanding their set of programmed responses; for proof, just ask Siri if she beatboxes — trust me. It is not too far-fetched to believethefuture ofaudiowill help streamline tasks via voice commands and allow us a more seamless, elegant way of communicating.

As it was intheeras of Gutenberg, Edison and Marconi,thetechnology is incipient and rudimentary, yet it’s rapidly improving.Theinternet brought a world of information to our fingertips, andtheIoT is wiring it all together. Imagine locatingthelatest sportscaster predictions fortheevening’s Red Sox/Rangers match-up, which Siri finds for me.Onthehorizon, programs like Alexa will ask how we like our morning coffee or offer a nudge when we run out of milk. Maybe Amazon Echo will read sections of our favorite publications, and provide route instructions for daily commutes based on up-to-date traffic patterns. Treadmills will nag us to get off our respective couches to exercise, portraying a boisterous personal trainer who keeps track of our calorie intake.Just as we entertheworld fully cognizant of our primary senses, soon they will becometheprimary means of how we communicate — both interpersonally and via technology — throughout our lives.

As it was intheeras of Gutenberg, Edison and Marconi,thetechnology is incipient and rudimentary, yet it’s rapidly improving.Theinternet brought a world of information to our fingertips, andtheIoT is wiring it all together. Imagine locatingthelatest sportscaster predictions fortheevening’s Red Sox/Rangers match-up, which Siri finds for me.

Onthehorizon, programs like Alexa will ask how we like our morning coffee or offer a nudge when we run out of milk. Maybe Amazon Echo will read sections of our favorite publications, and provide route instructions for daily commutes based on up-to-date traffic patterns. Treadmills will nag us to get off our respective couches to exercise, portraying a boisterous personal trainer who keeps track of our calorie intake.

Just as we entertheworld fully cognizant of our primary senses, soon they will becometheprimary means of how we communicate — both interpersonally and via technology — throughout our lives.