Meet your Disrupt SF Startup Battlefield Final Round Judges: Cyan Banister, Roelof Botha, Matthew Panzarino, Susan Wojcicki and Padmasree Warrior

Choosing this year’s Disrupt SF Startup Battlefield winners will be a tough job. There is an exceptionally strong and unique group of young companies competing in Startup Battlefield next week with 23 companies showcasing their innovative solutions to solving important and critical issues.

Thankfully, we have an experienced team of entrepreneurs and investors to help judge the Startup Battlefield competition. We carefully curated a group of Final Round judges that will bring their experience and expertise to choosing the next winner of the Disrupt Cup (and a huge $50,000 check)!

General admission ticketsare still available for Disrupt SF, which will grant attendees access to the three day conference including all the talks, the Startup Battlefield competition, and the after parties.

Please meet your esteemed final round judges for the Disrupt SF Startup Battlefield competition.

Cyan Banisteris a partner at Founders Fund, where she invests across sectors and stages with a particular interest in heavily regulated industries, marketplaces, SaaS and businesses that help people with basic skills find meaningful work. Prior to joining Founders Fund, Cyan was an active angel investor with a portfolio including Uber, Thumbtack, SpaceX, EShares, Postmates and Affirm.

Matthew Panzarinohas been a retail jockey, founded a professional photography business and a news blog covering the Apple ecosystem. He has served as News Editor and Managing Editor at The Next Web and is now Editor-In-Chief at TechCrunch.

Roelof Bothais a partner at Sequioia Capital where he focuses on Internet, services and software investments. He is a Director of Eventbrite, Evernote, Inside.com, MongoDB, Natera (NTRA), Plain Vanilla, Square (SQ), Unity Technologies, Weebly, and Whisper. He is also involved with Sequoia Capital portfolio companies including AssureX and Mapillary.

Susan Wojcickiis the CEO of YouTube. Previously, she was the Senior Vice President of Advertising & Commerce at Google. She oversaw the design, innovation and engineering of Google’s advertising, commerce, and measurement platform products, including AdWords, AdSense, DoubleClick, Offers, and Google Analytics.

Padmasree Warrioris Chief Executive Officer of NextEV, U.S. She also serves as the Chief Development Officer of NextEV, as well as a member of its Board of Directors. In these capacities, she is responsible for the brains of NextEV’s autonomous, electric vehicles and the overall user experience. She previously served as Cisco’s Chief Strategy Officer and Chief Technology Officer and Motorola’s CTO.

Get your ticketshere while you still can!

As always, if you are interested in becoming a sponsor, opportunities can be foundhere.