The Duke of York’s Pitch@Palace Global showcased hugely international startups

[youtube=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WA9ujpfinoU&w=560&h=315]

TechCrunch is delighted to bring you thePitch@Palace Global, broadcast last night directly fromSt. James’s Palacein London.

Established by The Duke of York in 2014, Pitch@Palace offers entrepreneurs the opportunity to present their business in front of an audience of influencers. And it’s brought something brand new to the startup ecosystem. Let’s face it, the contact book of The Duke of York is unrivalled, and startups can get enormous exposure to global players, VCs and especially international corporates.

During 2016, the initiative has expanded internationally, with the aim of developing links between U.K. and overseas entrepreneurs in a number of key markets. In 2016, Pitch@Palace events have taken place in Estonia, Mexico and Malaysia. Next year, events will take place in China, Australia and the Middle East.

On this occasion, the Duke hosted the first Pitch@Palace Global to showcase the winners from these events form this year. Twelve entrepreneurs representing these countries gave a three-minute pitch to an invited audience of high-profile investors and key business leaders.

The overall winner wasGongali Modelwhich provides a low-cost sustainable water filter (Nanofilter) for water purification, to overcome waterborne diseases and dental/bone fluorosis.

Here were the rest of the startups:

RangeForce– RangeForce is a cyber battle simulation platform that transforms IT professionals into cyber defenders.

Timbeter– Timbeter is a smart-device solution for quick and accurate timber measurement and data management.

Christy Ng Shoes– Christy Ng Shoes is a multi-channel footwear company that allows women to design their dream shoes, with more than one million design options and combinations.

Touristly– Touristly is a travel activities platform that helps travelers create, book and share itineraries to Asia Pacific.

Glatt Stove– Glatt Stove distributes clean cook stoves and fuel to save the lives of those who die from lack of access to clean cooking options.

Hablando con Julis– The technological solution for people with speech, reading and writing difficulties to be able to communicate effectively with you.

Reach– A social network based on geolocation and the integration of local authorities, citizens and artificial intelligence for the fight against crime.

Himore Medical– Himore Medical is a company that designs and manufactures low-cost medical devices for hospitals that need to use telemedicine to follow patients.

Hisky Medical– Hisky focuses on non-invasive disease diagnosis technologies and develops FibroTouch, which takes around one second for early diagnosis of liver injury.

Health Delivered– Health Delivered is a dietary management platform designed to tackle the growing rates of obesity, diabetes and other chronic health issues.

Opsys– Opsys is a multi-disciplinary engineering firm focused on fire prevention, simulated altitude training and cryogenics.