The land grab for farm data

Farmersare adopting smart-sensor technologies and connectedfarmequipmentmore quickly than ever, stretching each season to eke out greater yield from finite acreage.

This rise in so-called precision agriculture has precipitated a massive influx in unstructured “bushels to bytes”farmdata, creating new opportunities for an industry that has previously operated solely in the physical realm.

From government agencies to commodity traders, hedge funds, biotech companies and, of course, seed, chemical and fertilizer manufacturers, everyone wants a piece of the “internet offarming,” as evidencedhereandhere.

Specifically, ownership and control of agronomic and equipmentdatais understood to have dramatic escalating value. Which seed varieties were the most successful and where? Which plant populations performed best? Whose recommendations (e.g. nitrogen programs) outperformed their peers?

Which input datasets are used for these recommendations, how were they acquired and are they standardized and accessible? How are the big companies actually using thedata? Who has access, how long have they been acquiring it and how long do they keep it? Which documents did I sign to give them access?

Make no mistake, the ambiguity around the value of thisdatais intentional. Nobody wants to initiate paying for something that has always been free.

Regrettably, those who least understand the true value of thedataproduced arefarmersthemselves. Our neighbors around the country give theirdataaway for a pittance, or worse. Yet,datais one of themost valuablethingsfarmersharvest.

There’s no doubt that there is confusion around the “hard value” ofdata.Farmerstell me, “Look, I know that mydatahas value because everyone wants it. The part that frustrates me is that companies want mydatain return for some undefined ‘value.’ Meanwhile they are often upselling me for additional services that would not exist without mydata.”

Farmersknow in theory that it’s important to collectdata,and they do record some of it season by season.

Farmers, remember, were part of the very first wave of GPS adopters (long before Google Maps and car navigation systems), and continue to live and work at the forefront of technology in ways that surprise most Americans — who are unfamiliar with modern agriculture.

Althoughfarmersare, in many cases, adopting leading-edge “precision ag” technology, the value remains elusive and difficult to quantify. Datasets fill up their local hard drives and thumb drives, but, at the end of the day,farmersare not hard-core technologists ordatascientists, and don’t intend to be — they already have a full-time job with plenty to do.

But there’s a naive sense amongfarmersthat the digital revolution is in its early days, and that there is plenty of time to figure things out. It’s a “wait and see” mentality.

Against this backdrop, big companies are already usingfarmers’datawith and without permission, blurring the legal lines between ownership and control and taking advantage of the fact that they aren’t being held accountable. Yet.

The recent, hotly debated John Deere and Monsantoagreementis just one example of how quickly things are changing.

Monsanto entered the ag-connectivity world in 2012 when it acquired privately held Precision Planting ina deal valued up to $250 million. Fast-forward four years and Monsanto has parlayed their originaldatadeal into this more recent strategic partnership with John Deere that involves better access tofarmerdata. Rumors abound that little or no cash actually changed hands.

It’s clear thatdatais the new currency. The “DeereSanto” agreement is just one example of how the industry has demonstrated it will move forward with or withoutfarmers.

Furthermore, these issues are evolving quickly. The time to debatedataownership is now.Farmersare at risk of being left out of the conversation and the lucrative economics ofdataif we don’t speak up.

And I get it. It’s complicated. Yourfarmdatamight be generated from a John Deere terminal, which is communicating with the sensors on a Kinze planter and the digital layer is delivered to you as a hard copy map that was exported from a proprietary software system (e.g. from your genetics company). It’s easy to see why the equation is so hard to discern, and how it might be easy for afarmerto get lost in the dialogue amidst competing and powerful entities that have a vested interested in controlling the narrative.

Farmdatais expected to be a$20–$25 billionrevenue opportunity, but we haven’t yet determined how thedatacan be collected, structured, stored and shared, let alone monetized.

Today, there are no clear-cut guidelines regarding the privacy of thedata, nor itsownershipand control. Many different players impose contractual obligations in fine print, but few are likely to stick until there is wide-reaching agreement on what’s appropriate.

Contracts betweenfarmersand their partners are opaque at best, and manipulative at worst. It’s time we putfarmerdatarights up front, in clear language that establishes who owns thedata.

We need to make transparent and fair to all parties involved key issues likedataownership and control. We need to incentivize all parties to proliferatedatato mutual benefit.

Put simply, the industry also needs to come together to set new standards for connectedfarming. I’d argue that all of the stakeholders need to be involved in these conversations.

There is reason to feel optimistic. Over the past several months,37 industry participantshave taken a seat at the table to contribute to the creation of theTransparency Evaluator, an important tool built to bring transparency tofarmdataagreements. It is time for them to sign the documents they helped create.

Iffarmersare going to adopt precision agriculture and other modernfarmtechnologies, we can’t afford to ignore the value inherent in thedatacollected.

Farmdatais a key part of anyfarmer’s livelihood and should be treated accordingly. The standards by whichdataprivacy and ownership are governed depend on the industry’s willingness to engage in thedatatransparency discussion holistically.

The payoff is, of course, a dramatic upside in terms of profitability.Farmerswho collect and own theirdataare natural partners with companies who are trying to validate their product performance. The key is to properly align the incentive structure.Farmersneed a reason to ensure that gooddatais collected.

And third-partydatabuyers win, too.Databuyers that clearly state the information they are interested in acquiring will get a verified dataset. But let me be clear, they should be paying for this information. This payment is the tangible “value” thatfarmersare looking to get from theirdata.

The rules are being decided as we speak. Will ours be a coalition of a few, or many? Now is the time to get it right.