Apps for planning your vacation

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zqDumOb-TCo

It’s 4th of July weekend, and if you’re not off traveling somewhere, hopefully you’re taking a summer trip soon. FromKayaktoTripAdvisor, there are plenty of apps that want to help you maximize your vacation planning. We’ve found some others that are worth a mention, too. TechCrunch tested out dozens of travel apps; these are our favorites right now.

Hopper

Sometimes you know where you want to go, but you don’t know when. Not sure when the best time is to visit Hawaii? Then Hopper is the right app for you. Type in your desired destination and the app shows you a color-coded calendar that indicates when flights are the cheapest. Green means you’re getting a good deal and red means you’re paying the max. If you want to go from San Francisco to Hawaii, you’ll save $100 by going in September.

You can also set up price alerts and get notified when fares are coming down. Store your passenger and payment info, so you can book as soon as the flight fits your budget. The app is free and available on both the iPhone and Android.

Musement

We checked out a lot of city guides, but chose Musement for its sleek design and its commitment to showing you how the locals live. The app highlights New York’s best rooftop bars or where to get the city’s best hot dogs. Musement also makes it easy to sort what’s nearby and open right now.

The app incorporates Foursquare recommendations and has venue contact information integrated into each entry. You can also book event tickets, such as concerts, directly through the app. Musement is free and available on both the iPhone and Android.

The Outbound

If hiking and hang gliding are more your speed, check out The Outbound for planning an outdoor adventure. The Outbound makes it easy to search for places to go surfing, backpacking, mountain biking and more. Search by city and see suggested trails with photos and information about the route.

The Outbound provides tips for each activity, tells you what time of year to go and reminds you about what you need to pack. Now I know where to explore when I go to Big Sur…

The app is free and available on the iPhone.