Instagram rolls out a “Save Draft” feature to all users

Followingtestsearlier this year, Instagram todayconfirmedit’s rolling out a “Save Draft” feature to all users. This addition means you’re now able to begin working on a post, then save a copy of your changes to be completed later. This option appears when you hit the “Back” button in the app – something that would have previously discarded your edits.

The feature was firstspottedin testing this July, when a handful of users began seeing a “Save Draft” option appear in their app. The following month, the button rolled out more broadly, but the company at the time had only considered it an experiment. It had been running A/B tests, to see how the user base responded.

“We’re always testing new ways to improve the Instagram experience,” an Instagram spokesperson told us at the time.

Today, however, the feature is going live for all.

Trying to create a post that's just right? With the latest update, you can save as a draft & come back to it later.https://t.co/7lZ0eyNtBC

— Instagram (@instagram)September 20, 2016

After adding effects, filters, your caption or a location to your photo, you can tap the back arrow at the top left of the screen to see the new “Save Draft” button appear. However, you’ll only see this option if you’ve made changes to your photo, meaning you’ve edited it, tagged someone, or added your caption or location.

To return to your work, you’ll tap the Camera icon at the bottom of the screen, then tap “Library.” Posts will appear at the bottom below the title “Drafts.”

http://twitter.com/hautepop/status/760738430972203008/photo/1

http://twitter.com/lindork/status/756904354569785345/photo/1

Despite being a relatively minor addition, the Drafts option was met with joyous tweets by all those who happened across the feature earlier this summer – sentiments that likely led to the public launch. The feature isn’t just handy for those times you get too busy to post, but could also help those tasked with running a business or brand’s Instagram account prep their posts in advance of publishing.

The feature will roll out to all on Instagram’s iOS and Android applications.