TechCrunch returns to the UK for Disrupt London 2016

All right, startup fans in the U.K. and across Europe. We’re thrilled to announce that TechCrunch Disrupt is once again headed across the pond forDisrupt London 2016, and you are cordially invited to join us.

The festivities kick off December 3-4 with the hackathon, followed by Disrupt on December 5-6. We had so much fun last year that we’re excited to be returning to the beautiful Copper Box Arena in Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park for this year’s show.

While we’re not quite ready to reveal all of the details for the show, all of the staples that make Disrupt the best startup conference in Europe will be present. We’re putting together an impressive lineup of entrepreneurs, innovators and investors who will share their wisdom in a series of interviews and fireside chats throughout the show, and we’ll begin sharing those names soon.

We’ll also have dozens and dozens of early-stage international startups displaying their wares and pitching their products and services to attendees perusing the show floor in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley. The illustrious Startup Battlefield competition will once again feature several promising young companies competing in front of our panel of judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup, a £30,000 grand prize and the broad attention of the tech community.

And, of course, we’ll have parties. Lots of ‘em. So you and all your friends both new and old who attend Disrupt can keep the good times rolling long after the show floor closes up for the day.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £800 a piece. Or sign up with a co-worker and you can save an additional £100 off each ticket with our multi-ticket (2+) discount. You can get your ticketshereat this price until September 16.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card tostudents@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.