Early-bird ticket sales for Disrupt SF 2016 end Friday

All right all you procrastinators out there, the time to act is now. Early-bird tickets toDisrupt SF 2016are on sale now through Friday, August 12, and while you’ll still be able to buy tickets on Saturday, they’re going to set you back an additional $1,000. So what are you waiting for? Head toour ticketing pageto snag your discounted tickets for just $1,995 apiece.

We’re putting together our best show yet, lining up some of the biggest names in the startup industry for the many interviews and chats that take place during the duration of the show — folks like Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff and Facebook’s Head of Messaging Products David Marcus.

We’ll also be featuring and helping launch some of the hottest new startups in the industry in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, where literally hundreds of early stage companies will be pitching their wares to the thousands of people who will be walking the show floor during the three day conference.

Then there’s the Startup Battlefield competition, where companies will be competing in front of our panel of judges and the broad tech industry with the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup, a $50,000 check and the attention of the industry at large.

And if all that isn’t enough, you’ll be able to keep the fun and networking going long into the night with the many after-parties that take place during Disrupt.

But you won’t get to do any of it unless you get a ticket, and if you’re going to come to Disrupt, you might as well save $1,000 in the process. You can’t procrastinate much longer, of course, soget on over to our ticketing page todayand get your Disrupt tickets at the early-bird price before it increases on Saturday.

Disrupt SF 2016 takes place September 12-14 at San Francisco’s Pier 48, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

Oursponsorshelp make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@techcrunch.com.