There won’t be an ‘Uber for healthcare’ anytime soon

The passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act created a perfect storm of disruption in thehealthcareindustry. All at once came massive systemic changes, from the expansion of Medicaid and guaranteed issue to minimum essential benefits and the creation of exchanges.

In the wake of ACA,nearly one hundredcompanies sprang up to fulfill the promise of Obamacare and makehealthcarea consumer-driven, retail industry, where old work rules would be broken, novel business models established and new companies could command billion-dollar valuations in a short span of time.

Therewas a surge of excitement, and, as of June 2016, the U.S.healthcarespace had eight “unicorns” (companies valued at over $1 billion), including23andMevalued at $1.03 billion,Theranosat $9 billion andZenefitsat $4.5 billion.

Buthealthcareis a stubborn space. Think of it like a Rubik’s Cube, where every move has a ripple effect, and solving multi-faceted problems is parforthe course. In these conditions, innovative models battle strong headwinds — a fact many VCs and founders overlooked as they rushed to build businesses following the patterns of technology-driven disruption that have transformed industries such as shopping, transportation and entertainment. Those companies that approach this three-dimensional problem with only two dimensions — by cutting corners or finding “shortcuts” — have found themselves lost.

Theranos struggled to back up its claims and has beengiven bansfrom U.S. regulators. Zenefits has beenaccusedof selling insurance products without proper licenses. And not long ago, 23andMefailedto secure regulatory approval before making claims about the medical legitimacy oftheirdevices. All of these companies have since faced financial problems — Theranos isnearly worthless.

This string of high-profile debacles reveals a simple, but crucial fact: Disruptinghealthcareis not a sprint; it’s not even a marathon — it’s a grueling decathlon with hurdles every step of the way.

In addition to nailing all the prerequisites of a modern startup (an emphasis on exemplary design, scalable technology and sterling customer support), new entrants wanting to move fast must navigatehealthcare’s laundry list of regulations, abiding by specific federal and state regulatory requirements and the labyrinthine rules of the FDA.

Can we really expect true disruption, the game-changing disruption that companies likeUberand Airbnb have brought to transformtheirrespective industries? In a space that demands that new companies file 50 different sets of formsforeach state, the regulation inhealthcareis unrivaled by any other industry.

Beyond the regulations, which are nearly damning to disruption in and of themselves, we have to realize that thehealthcareenvironment is one in which trust is essential — which isn’tunreasonable, given purchasers are making decisions that literally involve life and death.

Building the necessary level of trust, however, takes a lot of time, and startups too often project growth based upon metrics driven byearlyadopters. But this category of customers is especially elusive inhealthcare. As an example, telemedicine is a brilliant solution that delivers fast, reliable care at a fraction of the price of a normal doctor visit, and yet it’s taken yearsfortelemedicine to really register on the U.S.healthcareradar.

The education and hand-holding necessary to achieve results might workfora shoe or taxi company, but changing people’s fundamental behaviors is difficult, especially when it comes totheirhealth and well-being. Strategies like creating incentives to eat healthier meals, go to the gym more often or wear activity trackers produce exciting, flashy results, but don’tdo much to create long-term improvements in overall health.

Finally, consumer choice withinhealthcareis fundamentally limited to certain key decisions. They can choosetheirinsurance plan, but only from the options provided by an employer or through an intermediary such as an exchange. They still must buy an insurance plan or face a penalty. When you take choice out of the equation, when consumers aren’tempowered to select the most efficient and affordable optionforthemselves, the challenges facing B2Chealthcarestartups are apparent.

To be sure,therehave been signs of success in the industry. Despite the challenges of changing people’s behavior,Omada Healthhas been tackling chronic disease with a slow and steady approach, which notably included Omadapublishing its ownclinical two-year study in the Journal of Internet Medical Research demonstrating the efficacy oftheirmodel. Such a move is slow and time-consuming, but it goes a long way in developing trust intheirproduct.

Sherpaa, a New York City-based digitalhealthcareservice, hasslowly grownitself by offering tangible cost-saving measures that promote patients’ using less-expensive care options such as telemedicine and emailing with doctors to diagnose a problem instead of booking a costly office or ER visit.

As much as people agree thathealthcarein America is in major need of repair (a recent pollfound the majority of Americans would even prefer a “Medicareforall”healthcaresolution),healthcarestartup founders can appreciatetherewill never be anUberofhealthcare.Uberturned consumers from one transportation method onto another, effectively selling champagne to the masses. They’ve been able to change consumer behavior in a short period of time. But in the realm ofhealthcare,thereare too many regulations, constraints and basic laws of human behavior to overcome.

But for the innovators who have the patience to follow through on their vision, and who don’t presume to cut the Gordian Knot of healthcare with a marketing gimmick or shiny app, there are fortunes to be made. Even more importantly, those innovations will facilitate lower costs, increased access and better outcomes to the U.S.healthcareconsumer — what every American deserves.