Sign up to volunteer at Disrupt SF

Do you enjoy rolling up your sleeves and want to help put on the best startup show in tech? If so, you should definitely sign up to be a TechCrunch Work Exchange Volunteer atDisrupt SF 2016.

TechCrunch is happy to announce that we are now accepting applications to the Work Exchange at this year’s show in San Francisco, and we hope you’ll consider joining us.

Volunteers selected for the Work Exchange program are required to work up to 16 hours during the conference. You’ll be assigned to various tasks, such as assembling the VIP goodie bags, staffing registration and scanning tickets, giving directions and answering attendee questions, moving boxes, placing signage or even helping out with the Hackathon presentations.

These things ensure our guests and presenters have an exceptional experience at the show, and we need your help to get it all done.

Work Exchange volunteers must be available for a mandatory orientation training on Friday, September 9 at 4pm at Pier 48. Volunteers must also be available to work shifts starting that same day after the orientation through to the last day of the conference on September 14. Shifts can start as early as 6am and end as late as 11pm, with each shift lasting anywhere from 2.5 to 8 hours.

In exchange for a little bit of work, volunteers are treated to an all-access pass to Disrupt, so you can take in the show when you’re not on shift. There, you’ll have the opportunity to network with the prominent people and companies attending the show. Plus, you’ll also get to connect and share learnings with other Work Exchange volunteers, creating lasting connections and friendships with like-minded startup enthusiasts.

Those who are accepted into the program are required to cover their own meals, housing and travel expenses. There will be opportunities for volunteers to share rooms, however, and we’ll send along an invitation to the program’sSlackchannel to all work exchange volunteers so that you can connect with all your new colleagues ahead of time.

You can apply to be a Work Exchange volunteer byfilling out this brief formno later than Friday, August 26. We’ll notify those selected into the program via email shortly after applications close. Due to high demand, we may not be able to notify those who aren’t selected into the program.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.