Only two days left to submit your Startup Battlefield application!

Yes, you read that right.Applicationsfor the Startup Battlefield at Disrupt London close this Thursday! Time to get going. You can do it.

We loved being in London so much that we’re bringing Disrupt back to welcome an all-new slate of outstanding startups, influential speakers, guests and more to the stage. Most of all, we want the hottest companies to launch — for the first time — on our stage. Don’t leave €30,000 on the table.Apply now!

Our European Battlefield alumni are a very strong group. This summer 26 (formerly Number26)raised an additional $40 millionand secured a full banking license. Aircallraised $8 millionfor its call center software-as-a-service. Olly by Emotechraised $10 millionto bring their AI-powered robot to market. Lystable continues to bring on clients at an alarming rate, as well asnotable investors,including Max Levchin. Photomath launched anew appwith the ability to solve handwritten math problems and Hamwells is shipping itse-shower. Crate.io, the winner of the Battlefield from Disrupt London 2014,raised $4 millionfor their next-gen SQL database.

Both Europe-based and non-Europe-based teams are eligible to apply, and the Battlefield has no funding minimum or maximum to participate. TechCrunch has seen teams in the “garage stage” all the way up to several million dollars in funding that are spinning off university research. That being said, most participating startups would consider themselves to be seed stage.

Startups from all verticals are eligible to participate in the Battlefield. Recently, the Battlefield has been the launch vehicle for startups in batteries, biotech, bitcoin, cloud computing, consumer hardware, dev tools, education, fintech, e-commerce, healthcare, emerging market connectivity, security and many others. Creating a new market? We like that, too.

One of our goals at TechCrunch is to bring new, interesting startups to light for our audience. Battlefield startups should, for the most part, be under the radar and should not have had a lot of previous press. Demo-day wrap-ups or short announcements for a beta product are usually allowed.

For more information and to apply to the Startup Battlefield, visithereand submit your application by October 13th at 12pm PT. Startups will find out in early November if they are selected to participate.

So what are you waiting for?Apply here!