Akamai buys Soha Systems to add more security to its cloud networking business

Consolidation continues to work its way through the world of enterprise startups. Today Akamaiannouncedthat it has acquiredSoha Systemsin an all-cash deal. Soha provides enterprise secure access as a service.

Akamai is not disclosing the value of the deal, saying it was immaterial for the company. The news comes less than a week after Akamai announced that it acquired an IoT-focused startup,Concord Systems, also for an undisclosed sum.

Soha, which is based in Sunnyvale and was founded in 2013, had raisedjust under $10 millionfrom investors that included Andreessen Horowitz, Cervin Ventures, Menlo Ventures and Moment Ventures.

The company will sit in wider portfolio of services that Akamai offers tosecure and optimise enterprise applications in the cloud, specifically its Cloud Networking Solutions. Akamai has made several other acquisitions in this space over the years,including Bloxxin November 2015; and DDoS specialistProlexic in 2013for $370 million.

The company has beenreportedlyinterested in stepping up the pace of its security acquisitions to improve its position in that market — a natural complement to its other business optimising and securing web traffic. At the same, time, the company has been periodically rumored as a target for the likes ofMicrosoftorGoogleto pick up so it can compete better against Amazon’s AWS.

Building up its security portfolio could serve in both scenarios: it helps Akamai strengthen its own business, and potentially makes it a more attractive acquisition target.

In the case of Soha, Akamai is tapping into an area where businesses are looking for better performance as they move more and more applications of their premises and into the cloud, or data centers, or a hybrid of the two.

“In many ways, the traditional enterprise model is ‘turning inside out’ with applications, employees and data moving to the cloud, well outside of the enterprise’s traditional zone of control. At the same time, security and IT teams remain responsible for ensuring visibility, security and performance,” explainedRobert Blumofe, executive vice president, Platform, and general manager, Enterprise and Carrier Division, Akamai, in a statement. “By adding Soha’s secure access technology to our Cloud Networking Solutions, we believe we are well positioned to help our customers take full advantage of the key trends, cloud and mobile, driving enterprise computing.”

It’s not clear how many customers Soha had prior to the deal but thecompany saidthat it would continue to work with them and keep its service operating as it has done under its new owner Akamai.

“Enterprise security is undergoing a phase shift and Soha’s secure access service has been designed to address the unique challenges businesses are facing in this era of hybrid data centers and mobile users,” saidHaseeb Budhani, co-founder and CEO,Soha Systems. “We look forward to fully integrating our groundbreaking solution as a high-value component of Akamai’s massively scalable, global platform.”