Weekly Roundup: Trump meets with tech leaders, Yahoo suffers another massive hack

This week, one could play Super Mario Run on iOS in a self-driving Uber if you lived in San Francisco. You could have also broadcast it live on Instagram or Snapchat to a group for the first time. These are the top stories in tech from this week, all in one place.You can also get this post as anewsletter in your inbox, because even in 2016, email won’t die.

1.President-elect Donald Trumpmet with some of the most prominent execs from the tech industrythis week, including Eric Schmidt and Larry Page of Google, Tim Cook of Apple, Satya Nadella of Microsoft and Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook. Oracle CEO Safra Catzjoined Trump’s transition team, and the Strategic and Policy Forumpicked up Uber CEO Travis Kalanick and Tesla’s Elon Musk as board members. While it appears advantageous for Uber to strategically sign on to ensure a smooth IPO process, Musk’s motivations remain unclear.

2.Yahoo suffered yet another massive hack. The company was alerted by law enforcement to the breach of 1 billion accounts and has examined the data with the help of outside forensic experts. It appears to be entirely separate from the otherbreach we learned about in September. Verizon must be feeling just stellar.

3.Uber’s self-driving carsstarted picking up passengersin San Francisco, and werepromptly ordered to stop. Uber began the launch with Volvo XC90 SUVs outfitted with sensors and supercomputers in an expansion of the self-driving pilot project in Pittsburgh. Uber didn’t have a necessary state permit needed to test autonomous vehicles on public roads, but launched anyway and isnow refusing to stop operating these vehicles.

4.Google announced that it is spinning out its self-driving car unit as aseparate company called Waymo. It will operate under Alphabet and will be more focused on self-driving tech rather than the cars themselves.

5.Facebook made a move to combat its fake news issue. The network will nowflag and down-rank fake newswith help from outside fact checkers at Snopes, FactCheck.org, Politifact, ABC News andAP. Baby steps?

6.Move over, Pokémon GO. The hot newSuper Mario Run gamebecame available on the App Store for iOS and iPad. It brings back all the Mario nostalgia one could hope for, and costs $10. It also crushed Pokémon GO’s record for Day One game downloads,surpassing 5 million.

7.Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos, Jack Ma, John Doerr and 16 other high-profile investors formed anew venture firm called Breakthrough Energy Ventures, which will pour at least $1 billion into cleantech companies over the next 20 years. They’re saying that they’re investing in tech ventures at any stage, from seed through commercialization and will focus on electricity, manufacturing, agriculture, buildings and transportation.

8.Apple’s AirPod wireless headphones went upfor sale for $159 on Apple’s site, and they’re charging $69 to replace a lost ‘Pod. Find my AirPods feature, anyone?

9.Instagram is on a roll. The app became the latest social platform to introduce live streaming as it released itslive video broadcast featureto all U.S. users. The app alsopassed 600 million downloads, a huge milestone fueled by its algorithmic feed. Instagram is one to watch, people.

10.Snapchat quietly shippedits new Groups featurethat lets you swap photos, video and messages with up to 16 people. Groundbreaking? No, but when an app has more than 100 million daily users, a feature like this could impact the way other messaging services like Messenger, WhatsApp or iMessage are used.

11.A shakeup at Oculus occurred asBrendan Iribe stepped down as CEOto lead a PC-based VR division within the company.