Spectacles finally arrive in NYC with a Central Park Snapbot store

Snapchat has been dropping its Spectacles-selling Snapbot vending machines at various spots across the country, but Monday marks the first time it’s put them on the east coast – and the new location is smack dab in themiddle of NYCat the southeast corner of Central Park. And the good news is this one will be operating through New Years’ Eve, marking the first time one hasn’t gone away in less than a day.

The Snapbot turned up there Monday morning, which is again less than 24 hours after the appearance of the previous one in the Grand Canyon on Sunday, which itself appeared less than a day after the one dropped at Rose Bowl Stadium in Pasadena on Saturday. The trend appears to be more frequent appearances; it could be only a matter of time before we see more than one pop-up at once.

Snap’s been dropping the Snapbot in various locations, where it remains for less than a day, or until its stock of Spectacles video recording sunglasses is depleted. The glasses come in three colors and record short video clips designed for use in Snapchat, with a round aspect ratio that lets users of the app rotate their phone and still get a full-screen view of the clips in either portrait or landscape.

https://twitter.com/TheJakeSchmidt/status/800671678477062144

A New York location is bound to draw a big crowd this AM, even though it’s sticking around, especially since east coast techies and hypebeasts have been limited to either paying a huge premium on eBay or trying to convince west coast friends to go wait in line to pick up a pair. This one is also right by the Apple Store, which is a pretty great place for a Snapbot-selling, line-drawing robot. It’s also right next to Trump Tower, however, which is a pretty awkward place for it to be given security at that locale right now.

Luckily it looks likeSnapchat is reloading this Snapbot, like it did with the first LA location, so you’re in luck if you’re in line already. Let us know what the scene is like if you drop by the NYC Snapbot.