Stephen Curry to talk passion projects Nothing But Nets, Slyce at Disrupt SF

TechCrunch is proud to announce that two-time NBA MVP and Golden State Warriors point guard, Stephen Curry, will be speaking onstage at TechCrunch Disrupt SF (Sept. 12-14).

In addition to having the most three-pointers in a season and leading the Warriors to the finals in back-to-back seasons, Curry is also an avid philanthropist and tech startup investor.

Curry has a window to the startup world through his role inSlyce, a content management platform that offers tools to brands to leverage talent through content distribution and analytics.

TechCrunch and Curry are partnering at Disrupt to support a cause that fights one of the oldest and deadliest diseases: malaria.

Curry is a champion of the United Nations Foundation’sNothing But Netscampaign, a global movement to save lives by fighting malaria, a disease which claims the life of a child every two minutes.Nothing But Netsraises awareness, funds, and voices to protect the most vulnerable families from this preventable disease.

“I am excited to be able to share the impactful work ofNothing But Netswith the TechCrunch Disrupt attendees,” said Curry. “Having the opportunity to continue to raise awareness and funds for the cause with such a creative and innovative audience is incredibly important to finding a solution to malaria.”

Over the last four years, for every three-pointer Curry made, hedonated three life-saving bed nets. In the 2015-2016 season, he made a record-breaking 402 three-pointers, totaling 1,206 lifesaving bed nets.

Curry will join us on stage at Disrupt on Tuesday Sept. 13 at 5:30 p.m. to talk about Slyce, Nothing But Nets, and the impact his basketball career has had on his off-the-court passions and interests.

Immediately afterwards, Curry will join theNothing But Netsteam and TechCrunch for a fundraising event on site in support of his work to end malaria. If you would like to meet Stephen Curry in person, get a photo with the NBA MVP, and help fight the scourge of malaria in Africa,click here.

The intimate reception will include a 15 minute Q&A moderated by sports journalist Rick Reilly who wrote the Sports Illustrated column that launched Nothing But Nets 10 years ago. All proceeds from the event will directly benefitNothing But Nets, and donations are tax-deductible. Tickets can be purchasedhere.

Attendance is limited to 50. Tickets are available to Disrupt attendees and non-attendees. In other words, a ticket to Disrupt is not required to get into this fundraiser, but if you’d like to buy one anyway, you can find it righthere.

For partnership and sponsorship opportunities, please contact Kavita Sood atksood@unfoundation.org.