Indeed owner Recruit Holdings confirms acquisition of Simply Hired

Back in May wereportedthat Simply Hired, a job portal with about 30 million users, was shutting down its existing operations as part of an acquisition, and today we finally have the details about what is happening next: its assets have beenacquiredbyRecruit Holdings, the massive group based out of Japan that owns Indeed.com and many other recruitment and job listings portals. Recruit plans to continue operating simplyhired.com, but now as a publishing partner of Indeed.

Terms of the deal are not being disclosed but we will see if we can find them out.

Recruit was therumored buyer, according to multiple sources who contacted us directly after our first report, as well as articlessubsequently published elsewhere, although neither company would confirm the details to us directly at the time.

Today, it’s a different story:

“Recruit Holdings Co., Ltd. hereby announces that it has acquired the assets of Simply Hired, effective today. www.simplyhired.com will continue to operate as a job search destination and will be a publishing partner of Indeed,” ashort statementnoted. “Recruit is committed to increasing its leadership position in the HR industry through both organic growth and M&A activities. In addition to strengthening its operations in Japan, Recruit sees many opportunities to grow in international markets and become a global HR leader.”

The acquisition underscores how there is ongoing consolidation in the recruitment market. In June,Monster acquired Jobr, a “Tinder for jobs” app. Microsoft’s $26 billion acquisition of LinkedIn will also raises the question of how and if Microsoft plans to build up LinkedIn’s sizeable recruitment business, or potentially sell it off to one of the other giant specialists in the field.

Recruit Holdings itself has been an active buyer not just ofjob finding sites like Indeed.com, but also of adjacent services, such asTreatwell(née Wahanda), a Style Seat-type company that lets you book appointments with beauty specialists; andQuandoo, an Opentable-style restaurant booking service. This latest move to grab Simply Hired will expand its footprint and economy of scale in owning the sites that people visit the most when looking for work, or to book workers.

Simply Hiredwas originally founded in 2004 and is based in Sunnyvale. In its time as a startup, it raisedjust over $34 millionin funding from investors that include Dave McClure, Foundation Capital, Guy Kawasaki, Fox, IDG Ventures and Ronald Conway, and expanded its operations to 24 countries and 12 languages.

The company built a brand for itself as not only a place where people could upload job listings, but more importantly as a search engine for jobs listed around the internet. (No big surprise, then, thatGoogle was among those reportedly interestedin buying Simply Hired some years ago.)

Simply Hired is no longer disclosing stats about its traffic, but just before Indeed acquired it, the company itself said it had around30 million visitorseach month, and that its searches covered some 6 million jobs across 700,000 employers. In comparison, Monsterclaimedin Q1 it had some 50,000 employers in its database, and does not disclose MAUs. Indeed.com says it hasmore than 180 million monthly active visitors.