User’s guide to Disrupt SF 2016

Hard to believe that Disrupt SF is just around the corner! Check out this guide for helpful event info.

We want you to have a successful experience at Disrupt. Check out these tips to have a great day.

Location & Parking:Disrupt SF’s location atPier 48is great because it is close to public transit and easily accessible via any shared ride service.Click on this mapfor parking lots and transit stop locations. We strongly encourage you to take transit or ride-sharing service each day of the conference.

The Giants play at AT&T Parkon MondayandTuesdayevenings andWednesdayafternoon.Lots BandEare located on South St. between 3rd St. and Terry A Francois Blvd. It’s about a 12 to 15-minute walk to Pier 48 from those lots.

Lots B & E Pricing Per Day:9/12: $16 all day if park before12:00pm, $38 all day if park after12:00pm9/13: $16 all day if park before12:00pm, $38 all day if park after12:00pm9/14: $38 all day

Parking will be at a premium andLot A will be closed to Disrupt parkingeach day due to the games, so we urge you again to use public transportation or take a ride-share service if possible. The easiest way to transfer onto MUNI from BART is at Embarcadero BART Station; SF MUNI’s2nd & Kingand4th & Kingstops are both an easy 10-minute walk to Pier 48.

For those coming from the South Bay,CalTrain San Francisco Stationis very close to the venue and a light 10-minute walk to Pier 48.

Official Disrupt Mobile App:Make sure to download the latest Disrupt app to connect and message with other attendees at Disrupt, check out exhibitors and peruse the agenda. (Note: You can only hear from other attendees if you have the app and sign in with your ticket info. So get the app and don’t miss out on people who may be trying to message you right now!)

Download the app foriPhoneandAndroid.

Registration:Universe is the official ticketing platform of Disrupt. If you purchased a ticket, you usedUniverse. We love them and we think you will, too. If you haven’t purchased a ticket, please go do thatnow!

TechCrunch Store:You’ve asked and we heard you. We’re launching a TechCrunch Store at Disrupt SF! Get exclusive, high-quality TechCrunch gear at the TechCrunch Booth. If you’re not able to make it, check out our items online attechcrunchstore.com!

Official Hackathon Platform:DevPost is reprising its role at the Disrupt Hackathon, providing the platform for ourwiki. Thanks, y’all!

Simultaneous Chinese Translation:Located in the back of the session hall, Chinese translation headsets will be available for main-stage speaker sessions. Chinese-speaking volunteers will be on site throughout the conference to assist as needed.

With so much happening at Disrupt, make sure to check out some special events and features.

VR/AR & AI Events:

At noon, five curated VR/AR startups (Monday) and five AI startups (Tuesday) will demo on the Showcase Stage in the heart of Startup Alley.

Monday: Check out the VR Pavilion just south of the Showcase stage. Mingle with them at the VR Reception from 5-6pm, right inside the pavilion.

Tuesday: AI startups will be exhibiting in the AI Pavilion just south of the Showcase stage. Mingle with them at the AI Reception from 5-6pm, right inside the pavilion.

China & Silicon Valley Reception:If you’re interested in learning more about the Chinese tech and business landscape, we’re hosting a reception on Monday from 6-8pm onsite at Disrupt, sponsored by GGV Capital. If you would like an invitation email us at marketing@beta.techcrunch.com.

Official Hardware Alley Sponsor:HP Tech Venturesis the official venture arm of the original Silicon Valley startup, focusing on global early-stage investments.

Office Hours:

Perkins Coie, the official legal services provider of Startup Alley, will again host office hours at Disrupt. Startups may meetwith attorneys from Perkins Coie to get courtesy legal advice.

prooVis the first ever Pilot-as-a-Service platform that solves Proof-of-Concept pains for global enterprises and startups/ISVs. proov will be hostingoffice hoursonsite to address PoC problems for free.

Custom Disruptor Award:Our partners love to celebrate innovation.iTutor Groupwill be awarding the Best International Digital Startup award, to be given to a company that exemplifies presence in the international and digital landscape in business today.

Braintreeis the Official Mobile Payments sponsor of Startup Alley. Hungry or curious? Braintree has got you covered! Visit theBraintreebooth to learn about payments, fuel up with a fresh donut from the food truck outside and try your hand at their claw machine to win anything from a gift card to a comfortable bed.

Toyotais the Official Automobile sponsor of Disrupt. Go on The Impossible Quest, a personalized VR experience starring Toyota’s most advanced hybrid yet, Prius Prime, and you. Take a test-drive through a limitless world inspired by visual futurist Syd Mead (Blade Runner).

Watch us on the web:If you’re an arm-chair Disruptor, you can watch the conference action from theTechCrunch homepage.

See you on Monday!