StubHub launches the first ticketing app for Apple TV

Apple TV is getting its first ticketing application today with the launch ofStubHub, which will allow owners of the fourth-generation Apple TV device to search for concert tickets, and even see what the view from a given section of seats would look like. However, when it comes time to actually make a purchase, the Apple TV app will redirect you back to your mobile phone to complete the process.

While it may seem like an odd idea to look for concert tickets from the TV’s big screen, StubHub has worked to take advantage of the format with features like its sideways scrolling user interface, use of event imagery to attract users’ interest, and high-resolution seat maps that help you get a feel for what it would be like to watch the event from that section.

The company says its goal was to inspire people looking for something to do by designing the app in a way that encourages browsing and discovery. That’s why features like the seat maps and photos from the concert or event are prioritized over more utilitarian functions like search, or even the checkout process, which you do from your phone.

When you find an event you want to attend, you’ll make the purchase via an SMS link that’s texted to your smartphone. When you click the link, you’ll be taken right to the checkout flow in the mobile app, or to the App Store or Play Store to download the app if you don’t already have it installed. This may be a bit of a disjointed experience, but StubHub wants to push people to mobile, as the majority of ticket sales will take place on mobile devices in a few years’ time, it says,citingits own research and third-party data.

The eBay-owned company today partners over 60 teams in MLB, NBA, NHL, MLS and NCAA, AEG, AXS and Spectra Ticketing & Fan Engagement. It alsorecently acquired Spain’s Ticketbitsfor $165 million to expand into Europe, Latin America and Asia.

In addition to Apple TV, StubHub has apps available for iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and Android.