Weekly Roundup: Tim Cook explains why he met with Trump, Uber stops self-driving pilot in SF

Uber took its self-driving vehicle fleet to Arizona after being kicked out of San Francisco, Tim Cook cleared up why he met with Trump, and executive level shakeups occurred at Twitter this week. These are the top tech stories all in one place.

You can alsoget this post as a newsletter in your inbox, if you like. Want more tech news?Subscribe to The Daily Crunchfor more frequent updates.

1.Apple CEO Tim Cook waspart of a round table of tech leadersthat met with Trump last week, and some were confused as to why. Cook sent out an internal memo to employees explainingwhy he met with Trump. The short of it was that you have to show up in order to have a say. “Personally, I’ve never found being on the sideline a successful place to be,” wrote Cook. “The way that you influence these issues is to be in the arena.”

2.Amid notions that the popularity of Apple’s portable laptops and slower upgrade cycle of desktop products, some have suggested Apple’s commitment to the desktop product. But in a posting to an employee message board,Tim Cook confirmed that Apple is indeed still working on the desktop. “Let me be very clear: we have great desktops in our roadmap. Nobody should worry about that,” Cook said.

3.Uber’sself-driving pilot in San Franciscocame to a hard stop, following a meeting with the California DMV and Attorney General’s office. Uber had been ordered to cease operations due to thelack of a proper state permit. A cyclist advocacy group also warned that the self-driving units could putbikers at risk. Uber willdeploy the vehicles in Arizonafor the time being.

4.As 2016 comes to a close, we looked at the highs and lows of how top tech companies performed throughout the year.Apple’s bulletproof Wall Street growth story came to a haltas iPhone sales slowed and interest in the Apple Watch declined.Google proved it is more than just a search enginethis year as it introduced two major hardware products, the Google Pixel and Google Home.Amazon’s AWS had a breakout year, but 2017 could see an even larger wave for the ecommerce company.Twitter’s future remains uncertainamid layoffs, slowed user growth and a botched acquisition that plagued the network in 2016. This year saw10 acquisitions and a new Chief Equality Officer position filled for Salesforce.

5.There were a few executive level shakeups this week. Asenior staff member of Oracle, George A. Polisner,resignedafter the enterprise tech titan’s co-CEO, Safra Catz, joined the Trump transition team and stated her enthusiasm for the president-elect.

6.Twitter just can’t catch a break. Adam Messinger, who has been the company’s CTO for nearly four years, said he wasleaving the company. Twitter VP of product Josh McFarland isalso leaving to join Greylock Partners.

7.Super Mario Run finally hit the iPhone,crushing mobile gaming download records. ButNintendo did not have a good week. The company’s shares dropped about 15 percent in five days following the launch, which shaved off a significant amount of the company’s market cap. $10 just might be too much to ask for a mobile game.

8.An Uber employeefiled a lawsuitaccusing the company of misleading employees about their equity compensation. Uber “devised a fraudulent scheme to recruit highly sought software engineers,” according to the case.

9.It looks like Facebook is beginning to take responsibility for its role in informing today’s world. “Facebook is a new kind of platform. It’s not a traditional technology company,” said CEO Mark Zuckerberg in aLive video year-end chatwith COO Sheryl Sandberg. “It’s not a traditional media company. You know, we build technology and we feel responsible for how it’s used.”

10.The internet has brought us into a new era where the digital is affecting the real. But the rise of abuse on social networks would lead one to believe that internet users still think the two realities are separate.“Once we could cancel our subscription to the daily paper if we didn’t like the news. How can we cancel our subscription to the defining medium of the 21st century?” writes John Biggs inThe rise of 4chan politics.

11.There’s room for one more ride sharing unicorn. Uber’s Middle Eastern rivalCareem reported that it raised a $350M funding roundat a $1B valuation.

12.Almost a year after six months after it was supposed to arrive on iPhone, theBitTorrent Live app quietly became available on iOS.BitTorrent has done for live video what it did for file downloads: invented peer-to-peer tech that moves data transfer from a centralized source to the people.

13.2016 was ayear of change for Google: It was the first full year after the surpriseGoogle/Alphabet reorgand the year that saw Googleget seriousabout its own hardware,the cloudand theenterprise. Across the industry, 2016 was also the year of AI and machine learning — and Google was at the forefront of this.