Surf Air is expanding its “all-you-can-fly” service to Europe

Surf Air, the travel startup that offers “all you can fly” service to paying members, will begin running routes in Europe this October, the company announced today.

Specifically, Surf Air’sEuropean routeswill include multiple daily flights between UK’s London Luton Airport, and other business hubs like Cannes, Geneva and Zurich.

The company also intends to offer weekend flights to popular holiday destinations like Ibiza, with expanded, European service to Dublin, Paris, Amsterdam and Barcelona in 2017.

In the U.S. Surf Air flies its subscribers to small airports near major business and tourism destinations including: Los Angeles, San Francisco, Reno (via Truckee), Palm Springs, and Napa.

Members pay a $1,000 initiation fee and $1,950 a month for the service domestically. The company’s fleet is comprised ofPilatus PC-12 NG aircraft, which are seven-seat business turboprops, with cabins designed by BMW DesignworksUSA.

Members of the European service will pay £2500 a month, after an initiation fee, to fly an unlimited number of times between Surf Air’s destinations. They can also purchase guest passes for friends and family for £750 one-way.

The company’s app lets members book flights and valet parking also provided by the company at the airport.

The European expansion will make Surf Air more competitive with business travel offerings from fractional jet ownership, or charter services, such as Vista Jet and NetJets already operating there, and startups likeJetSmarter,which lets its members book unused seats on someone else’s private jet.

Surf Air’s competition in the U.S. also includesWheels Up, which charges its members for hours flown after a lower annual membership fee.

Founded in 2011, Surf Air has raised $18.76 million in equity funding from investors including Anthem Venture Partners, Baroda Ventures, Base Ventures, NEA, ff Venture Capital and Mucker Lab. It has also raised debt to purchase aircraft and support its expansion.