Meet the five startups vying for Best App at the 10th Annual Crunchies Awards

2016 sucked, if we’re being honest with ourselves. But the year wasn’t a total waste. The world of tech offered up a few shining stars in 2016, and in the era of apps, five standouts were nominated as finalists for The Best App of 2016 award.

As the show grows nigh, we thought it might be helpful to let you get to know some of these startups. So without any further ado, here are the five apps vying for Best App at the10th Annual Crunchies, going down the evening of February 6th, 2017.

Best App Finalists:

Period-tracking app Clue has had a big year. Alongside a fresh $20 million in funding, the Berlin-based company has also surpassed 5 million users. Not to mention, the app is collecting all kinds of valuable data, from its users’ moods to when they’re “in the mood.”

In a social landscape dominated by Instagram, Facebook and Snapchat, Musical.ly has found quite a bit of success with young people. The music video app (kind of like Dubsmash) was reported to have raised $100 million at a $500 million valuation in 2016, and has clocked in at 40 million MAUs.

In the last year, no app has made quite as big of a splash as Niantic’s Pokémon GO. Kids and adults alike flocked to the app, which was the fastest-growing mobile game in history. Plus, Pokémon GO was the fastest game to ever hit$500 million in revenue.

2016 might be the year of video, but Prisma proved that photos are still the bread and butter of social media. The AI-powered photo-filter app has created a bit of a trend, with players like Snapchat copying the artistic filters, as well as framing company Level getting in on the action.

Marijuana legalization is upon us, and Weedmaps has quite the head start. The app can help you with just about anything pot-related, from information about various strains to nearby dispensaries.

You can check out the full list of 10th Annual Crunchies Awards finalistshere.

Or… you can justbuy a ticketto the Crunchies and join us as we celebrate the best tech, products and people of 2016.