Ontame.io wants to be ‘Google Analytics’ for recruiters

Ontame.io, a relatively new startup from the former CTO and CEO of Graduateland (which recentlyacquiredTyba), is building a product to bring better analytics to recruitment.

The idea is to be able to track not just where applicant and referral traffic comes from, but how this correlates to the quality of an applicant and whether or not it leads to an eventual hire.

“We created Ontame.io, with the goal of being Google Analytics for recruiters – allowing recruiters to measure all their traffic channels from first interaction to ultimate hire of a candidate,” explains Jens Reimer Olesen, co-founder and CEO of Ontame.io.

This, I’m told, enables recruiters to evaluate traffic channels based on meaningful recruitment metrics, instead of vanity metrics such as number of clicks or applications (which, says Olesen, are the only metrics traffic channels can provide).

“We do this by merging web data from the employer’s own website with funnel data from their ATS [Applicant Tracking System] and serving this in a SaaS analytics platform,” he says, adding that Ontame.io now tracks more than 100 million events on a monthly basis.

In other words, the integration with an ATS to see the outcome actually produced by online applicant traffic is something that beats the likes of Google Analytics when measuring the ROI for a recruitment campaign.

“Google Analytics allows you to measure top of funnel traffic i.e. from visit to application. But since you cannot merge it with your ATS data, you are not able to see what happens to the candidate after the application has been filed (are they hired, rejected, put on hold etc.), so basically you have no clue where the 10 new people you just hired came from”.

Meanwhile, the 2015-founded Danish startup, which has been flying relatively under the radar but already counts BMW, PwC, and Nordea (one of the biggest banks in Scandinavia) as customers, is disclosing that it’s raised $1 million in seed funding.

Backers include SEED Capital Denmark, Lars Ingerslev (former MD of LinkedIn Nordics) and Magnus Kjøller (a prominent Danish business angel).