Tech’s 2016 in diversity, and more cars that drive themselves: It’s The Daily Crunch

Every Monday, Wednesday and Friday our daily guided tour of the biggest tech stories from the past 24 hours will appear here on TechCrunch.com. To getThe Daily Crunchin your inbox every day of the week, sign up hereand be sure to take a look atthe rest of our newsletters while you’re at it.

How did the tech industry rate in terms of diversity and inclusion in 2016? That answer and more in The Daily Crunch for December 19, 2016. And more self-driving news than you can shake a stick at, as is becoming the norm.

1.Tech’s 2016 in diversity and inclusion

How did the tech industry do in its efforts to promote diversity and inclusion in 2016? Megan takes a look at the year in review, with a focus on the key stories that moved the needle in this area during the last 12 months.

Unsurprisingly, it’s a mixed bag, but there are some promising highlights alongside the disappointing lowlights. Zuckerberg having to pen a memo decrying employee racism is definitely one of the lowlights.

2.What’s a ‘Brexit?’

We kinda know what it is but we don’t really know what it is, so Natasha has taken on the unenviable task of explaining Brexit in detail. This is all you need to know unless you’re in a position to affect the outcome of Brexit one way or another, probably.

3.Pokémon Go is still headed to Apple Watch

Scurrilous rumors suggested Niantic was potentially going to kill its Apple Watch app for Pokémon Go, but the company has assured us that this isn’t the case. The timeline for the app was before the end of the year, though, so if it wants to hit that window something has to happen soon.

4.BlackBerry builds a self-driving facility in its own backyard

Self-driving is the keyword to watch, and BlackBerry wants some of its ambient coolness. The company is pushing subsidiary QNX deeper into the autonomous vehicle world, with a new research facility focused on the area opening up in Ottawa. Unlike the previous IoT play QNX made, this one could actually have substance – the software has been used in vehicles for years.

5.Waymo’s new autonomous minivans

Meanwhile Alphabet’s Waymo has some new self-driving cars in its own fleet – Chrysler Pacifica minivans created in tandem with FCA over the course of six months. They number 100 in total, and could be very interesting if rumors of a ride-sharing service being jointly launched by Chrysler and Waymo pan out.

6.Elon Musk could get really boring

Tunneling is serious business – and it’s business that Elon Musk might be pursuing himself. The CEO of SpaceX and Tesla who recently acquired SolarCity doesn’t have enough on his plate, so he wants to tackle traffic with underground routes. Or something.

7.Can I Kik it? Yes, you can – in group video chat

Mobile chat app Kik has added video chat to the app, including group video calling that could be a big hit with its teen audience. Kik has previously admitted its growth is essentially stalled, so maybe team talking with moving pictures will help with that.