What Salesforce’s acquisition of Quip means for enterprise software startups

A new player has entered theenterpriseproductivity race. For decades, Microsoft reigned as the market leader inenterpriseproductivity — until Google pushed into the space with Google Apps. Now, with theacquisitionofQuip, Salesforce is joining Microsoft and Google in the race.

The implications, however, extend far beyond productivity and CRM. Recent developments inenterprisesoftware— includingOracle’sacquisitionof NetSuite,Microsoft’s purchase of LinkedInandSalesforce’sacquisitionof DemandwareandQuip— point to a shift in the market.

Enterprisesoftware(not just productivity apps) can no longer be siloed applications bolted together with varying degrees of integration. Today’s tools are expected to be cross-functional, with native integration, real-time collaboration and smart communication at their very core.

Enterprisesoftwaregiants across different verticals are moving in the direction of end-to-end solutions in an attempt to own more of the workflow — Salesforce’sacquisitionofQuipwill only intensify the competition. Forenterprisesoftwarestartups, it’s indicative of more mergers and acquisitions to come.

Enterprisesoftwarespending is on an upward trend, and is expected to reach$326 billion this year; meanwhile,startupsand investors have taken notice. There are currently 1,425 activestartupsin the space —as listed by CrunchBase— and there’s been an influx of venture funding. According to PitchBook, venture funding ofenterpriseproductivitystartupshas more than doubled, from $4.75 billion in 2012 to $11.46 billion last year. This year, thesesoftwarestartupshave already raised $6.26 billion to date, and the median deal size is up 25 percent compared to 2015, reflecting current market demand and investor appetite.

With investors hot onenterprisestartups, the market will become more fragmented and saturated than ever before. End users are already inundated with dozens, if not hundreds, of similarsoftwaresolutions, each which focus on filling one specific business need as effectively and efficiently as possible.

In an environment where the biggest technology leaders are looking tostartupsfor new innovation and transformation, there will likely be a coming spike in M&A activity. A historical analysis of CrunchBase data reveals an ongoing trend:enterprisesoftwarestartupsare seven times more likely to get acquired than they are to shut down, while only 4 percent make it to an IPO.

Productivity is a loosely defined category, but it starts with word processors, spreadsheet applications, presentationsoftwareand others (think Microsoft Office or Google Apps for Work). Aside fromQuip, there are still quite a few notablestartupsdisrupting this space.

Standalone solutions likePrezi, the interactive presentation startup that’s raised $73 million and attracted 75 million customers, andPaper, Dropbox’s answer to Google Docs, are pushing the boundaries of how productivity apps should function.

Others likeBlockspringaren’t reinventing the wheel, but instead are innovating on existing products. The young startup, which raised $3.4 million in seed funding, connects spreadsheets like Excel and Google Sheets to make it easier to import data from third-party services likeMailChimp,SlackandLinkedIn.

Any of these types ofstartupscould make for a strategicacquisitionby largersoftwarecompanies that are either looking to strengthen existing products or expand their offering into other verticals.

Email clients and collaborative communication platforms are at the epicenter of modern workflows. For asoftwaregiant like Salesforce, whose core product (CRM) relies so heavily on email communications,startupsin this segment are particularly attractive targets for anacquisition.

Frontoffers a collaborative email platform that reinvents (or at least improves) email by adding a social layer with the “shared inbox.” Founded in 2013, Front has raised more than $13 million from investors, one of whom is Slack’s co-founder,Stewart Butterfield.

Speaking of Slack, many messaging-based platforms are attempting to displace email as the main form of communication.Redbooth, a startup that’s raised $19 million, and seed-stagestartupsAzendooandFleepare also following in Slack’s footsteps with team messaging platforms that aim to enhance productivity and collaboration.

There are many other verticals withinenterprisesoftware— from project management and marketing automation to business analytics — but CRM is especially interesting, given two factors: (1) Salesforce’s involvement in theenterpriserace and (2) CRM’s role in driving revenue and business growth, making it one of the most valuablesoftwarecategories inenterprisesoftware.

That said, CRMstartupsare plentiful and only a few are interesting enough to stand out.Heymarket, a startup founded this year, offers a CRM to help businesses manage text message communications, which could make for an interesting addition to an existing CRM suite’s arsenal.

So whichstartupsare gunning to takeQuip’s place? The answer is surprising: none. There are hundreds of task/project management apps and dozens of communication platforms, yet full productivity suites are few and far between.

Sure, there are solutions likeOnlyOffice,Zoho DocsandPolaris Office, but these can hardly be consideredstartups. That last part is important becausestartups, with their fresh outlook and high risk tolerance, are the true drivers of innovation.

Whether the lack ofstartupsin this segment is because entrepreneurs and/or investors perceive the barrier to entry to be too high, or they see limited opportunity,Quip’sacquisitionis sure to spark new interest. Meanwhile,enterprisegiants will continue snapping up theseenterprisesoftwareupstarts to bolster and innovate higher-performance offerings in an attempt to provide customers with a seamless, uninterrupted workflow.