Startup Battlefield application deadline extended for Disrupt London!

Attention startup hopefuls: It’s time to stop procrastinating andapply for the Startup Battlefieldat Disrupt London. Startups from across the U.S. and around the world now have until 12pm PT on October 13th to get their application in front of the selection team.Apply now!

We get it, you’re super busy. Maybe you’ve been working extra hard to push out new features to your users, find the perfect hire or scout office space. Maybe you just forgot when the actual deadline was. Whatever the reason, TechCrunch is giving you another chance tosubmit your application.

So, why should you compete in the Startup Battlefield? For starters, you’ll get to present your company to the best and brightest entrepreneurs and investors in the world who will give you incredible feedback on how to make your product or service even better.

Our European Battlefield Alumni are a very strong group. This summer 26 (formerly Number26)raised an additional $40 millionand secured a full banking license. Aircallraised $8 millionfor its call center software-as-a-service. Olly by Emotechraised $10 millionto bring their AI-powered robot to market. Lystable continues to bring on clients at an alarming rate, as well asnotable investors,including Max Levchin. Photomath launched anew appwith the ability to solve handwritten math problems and Hamwells is shipping itse-shower. Crate.io, the winner of the Battlefield from Disrupt London 2014,raised $4 millionfor their next-gen SQL database. This group has been busy.

Since 2007,the 610 Battlefield companieshave raised more than $6.1 billion after appearing on the TechCrunch stage, and 78 have exited. Our alumni also include household names like Fitbit, Venmo, Postmates andmany others.

Startup Battlefield participants also receive free demo space in Startup Alley, tickets to VIP events, a Battlefield-only reception and, of course, TechCrunch swag. Prior to the event, startups work with TechCrunch editors to hone and polish their pitches.

And the best part? There are absolutely no fees, equity or otherwise, to participate in the Startup Battlefield. TechCrunch recently launched the Startup BattlefieldScholarship Fund, so there are really no excuses. Sounds pretty good, huh?Submit an application today.

All verticals are welcome, including (but not limited to) biotech, security, drones, supercomputing, e-commerce, on-demand services, greentech, edtech, mobile consumer, healthcare, enterprise software, bitcoin, hardware, AI, dev tools and VR. Startups from around the world are encouraged to apply!

Disrupt London will take place December 5-6th at the CopperBox Arena. Full details on eligibility can be foundhere. Applications are now open through October 13th at 12pm PT. To apply, head on over to ourStartup Battlefield page.