AR pioneer Omar Tayeb, of Blippar, is speaking at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! One month to go! It will betheplace to come talk about new technology, your startup, other startups, everyone’s startups! Grab ticketshere. So many speakers have already been announced. But, yes, there are even more to come. Today we’re delighted to say Omar Tayeb, CTO and Co-Founder ofBlippar, the a leading augmented reality, artificial intelligence, and computer vision company, is coming along.

Tayeb is credited for developing the original technology responsible for launching Blippar into the forefront of the AR industry. His passion for innovation has been instrumental in powering the AR and visual discovery experiences that have attracted over 66+ million users to the platform. Tayeb leads the tech team and is the company’s point person for AR and AI development. As the driver of the company’s technology and innovation, Tayeb is responsible for pushing the boundaries for what’s possible not only for Blippar but for the AR industry as a whole. Today, he continues to drive innovation at Blippar by furthering the development of their artificial intelligence and computer vision technologies and leading Blippar’s R&D unit and team of over 70 engineers.

With Tayeb at the helm of the company’s technology division, Blippar has grown from a groundbreaking idea to a global industry leader with 12 offices and 300+ employees. Blippar has been recognized as a “Fastest Growing” company by CNN, CNBC, UKTI, Forbes, and Fast Company, featured in the #9 spot on the 2016 CNBC Disruptor 50 list, and named one of the 2016 Bloomberg Business Innovators.

Tayeb was recognized as Young Innovator of the Year by the Guardian in 2012 and in 2014 he received the h100 award, which celebrates the 100 most influential and innovative people in Britain.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your ticketsat this price until 4 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.