‘Graham’ shows how an evolved human body could survive a car accident

Human bodies aren’t evolving quickly enough to withstand the force of a major car accident using today’s auto technology.

To help illustrate this, Australia’sTransport Accident Commission has built Graham— a lifelike, interactive model made to show the bodily features that humans might be equipped with if we evolve to endure blunt force in crashes. Essentially, Graham is the only one out here that can survive a major collision on the road. Unless you can evolve to his level.

The auto safety project concentrates on Graham’s eight crucial body zones, including the brain, skull, face, neck, rib cage, skin, knees, and legs/feet. Thestudy then goes zone-by-zone, describing how each body part would need to evolve to withstand such force during a crash.

For example, the TAC made Graham’s skull bigger, filling it with more cerebrospinal fluid and ligaments to prepare the brain for when a collision occurs, offering him greater safety.

Graham’s rib-cage protection was bolstered with a barrel-like chest with sacks between each of his ribs that would act like airbags during a crash.

[youtube=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=komX6_N6ozc&w=560&h=315]

And TAC gave Graham hoof-like legs with added joints that would allow him to spring up and out of the way during a crash to avoid enduring major force.

Hoof-like legs to minimize leg and foot injuries during an accident? Probably not evolutionary traits in our near futures. But that’s the point that TAC is trying to drive home — rather than leaving solutions to evolution, improved roads could help in the meantime.

“Cars have evolved a lot faster than humans and Graham helps us understand why we need to improve every aspect of our roads system to protect ourselves from our own mistakes,” TAC chief executive officer Joe Calafiore said in the organization’s press release.

TAC worked with an auto accident expert, trauma surgeon, and Melbourne artist to bring Graham to his lifelike state.