Demystifying the booming mobile advertising market

We’re on the verge of another digital revolution. I’ve seen it before, when I was at DoubleClick in 1997, and I’m seeing it now asmobilebegins to take over the hearts and minds of marketers,advertisersand corporations.

At DoubleClick, I helped start our international operations and targeted large brands to convince them of the benefits of internetadvertising— “the most targetable media ever.” It was a tough job: The idea was novel and a little ahead of themarketat that time. (To put it into context, thefirst banneradwas only sold on October 27, 1994.) I still remember the CMO of a Fortune 500 tech company didn’t even have email on her desktop in 1998.

But the attention of consumers was quickly shifting to the internet, and the media spend had to follow. We used to tell ourselves that when the Top 10 onlineadvertisersmirrored the list of the Top 10advertisersin any given country, we would have arrived.

Enter the dot-comboom. Many of these new companies had huge budgets, asked very few questions and were just throwing marketing dollars at user acquisition in whichever channel they thought might make sense — with web ads being the most popular. Driven by the spending frenzy from those companies, revenues from internetadvertisingsoared to an astounding$4.62 billionby the end of 1999.

However, the fundamentals underpinning the ROI of this spend were not really there (yet). The required level of customer acquisition was not attained; not enough customers were retained to sustain the level of expenditure. And the sole reliance on one single channel for user acquisition was never sustainable. RememberKozmo.com? There were many more.

By the summer of 2001, the dot-com bubble had burst and DoubleClick was no longer in the media business (and a lot worse would happen in September). From its peak in 2000, onlineadvertisingwould not recover until 2004.

Of course, those who secretly desired for this new media to disappear would be sorely disappointed. The internet “scaled,” penetration and bandwidth increased, download speeds and the cost of technology plummeted and the internet morphed into what we have today. Consumer attention continued to shift to digital formats and the internet media in its entirety has taken the largestmarketshare (33 percent) inadvertising.

Advertisingmarketgrowth picked up again in 2009, and this timemobileis fueling the new wave ofad-dollar spend. Apple launched the App Store in June 2008, andmobileas we know it today started to take off. Consumers spend anincreasing percentageof their time onmobiledevices, andmobiledevice users have surpassed desktop users for media and website consumption.

Similarly,mobileadvertisingspending now represents the largest share of totaladrevenues.

Furthermore, the discrepancy betweenmobileconsumption andmobileaddollars, a metric Mary Meeker has tracked since the early days of internetadvertising, has positioned themarketfor further and faster growth in the coming years.

To paraphrase Mark Twain, could the history of early internetadvertisingbe rhyming in 2016?

Companies that focused onmobileearly have built huge businesses serving theseadvertisers. Take Facebook for example.Mobileadrevenues representedapproximately 82 percentof alladvertisingrevenue for Facebook in Q1 2016, up 73 percent YoY. And app install ads already were accounting formore than halfof itsmobilerevenue in 2015 — and the percentage can only go up.

That number, as you can tell, represents a much higher proportion than the overallindustry. Google claims that its app install ads product, Universal App Campaigns, has driven2 billion app installs. With anestimated $1.5 per install, that’s about $3 billion in total revenue. Both companies have very good reasons to stay quiet about just who makes up that spend. Even a passing guess would not lead you to any of the Top 10 overalladvertisersin the country. (This idea was recentlyechoed by Snapchat founder Evan Spiegel, who stated that VC money was driving up the app installmarket.)

And again, the business fundamentals for traditional marketing are not there. What do I mean by fundamentals? It’s a mix of customer acquisition, retention and engagement. Marketers are paying anywherefrom $2-$4 for every app installand, yet, only 10 percent of those new users are using the app a week after downloading it. That means brands will need to make $30 per acquired userin 7 days. There are not many businesses that can sustain customer acquisition costs of that nature.

At the same time, the growth ofmobileand evidence that the app is a much preferred user experience is leading to increased focus on the part of traditional marketers who realize that they need to use this channel to fully engage today’s consumer.

Consumersengage at higher rates— at every step of the funnel — in amobileapp than they do on themobileweb (and even better than desktop), and convert at anywhere from 100 percent to 300 percent better thanmobileweb. Furthermore, according to acomScore study, app users spend more than three hours per month on the top 1,000 apps, which is 18x greater than whatmobileweb visitors spend on the top 1,000 web properties.

The early money inmobileappadvertisingwas spent by companies that had few other options when it comes to app marketing. When you are an app-only or app-heavy company, app install ads are the only quick and easy way to acquire new users. In fact, those are the types of companies that make up most of the highest spenders on these types of ads.

Here are the Top 10 fastest growing apps within the 50-100 million range (as a proxy formobileapp ads spend):

Opera Mini web browser

Uber

File Commander – File Manager

Sing! Karaoke by Smule

SimSimi by simsimi inc.

Kika Keyboard – Emoji, GIFs

Slither.io

Clash Royale

SuperB Cleaner (Boost & Clean)

Microsoft Word

Source:IronSource, which specializes inmobileappadvertisingand analytics

In fact, Chris Cunningham, global head ofmobileand brand partnerships at IronSource,said that“what’s drivingmobilebudgets is not brands like Coca-Cola but gaming companies and lifestyle apps.”

As more traditional marketers recognize the opportunity in engaging their consumers through apps, they won’t be as single-channel dependent. They will start to diversify their strategy and continue to acquire new customers in various channels and focus on converting their existing customers into new app users (and more engaged customers) through those traditional channels. Looking for ways to seamlessly integrate their apps into their other marketing channels will be increasingly important, and they’ll be able to grow theirmobilebusiness without spending the exorbitant prices that many of the early adopters have needed to.

Don’t look for me to be shorting Facebook or Google (I own both); they have too strong a business and amazing growth opportunities innew initiatives. But I do think their reliance on app install ads is disproportionate, and it will recalibrate as themarketmoves toward the Top 10mobileadvertisersmatching the Top 10advertisersoverall. Just like what happened with internetadvertisingin the early aughts.