Facebook’s VIP app Mentions adds Live video drafts, comment blacklists, replay trimming

Facebook is turning its public figures-onlyMentions appinto a handheld video studio with a slew of new Live broadcastingfeaturesrolling out the next few weeks. Mentions oniOSandAndroidwill let broadcasters control brightness and mirroring through an adjustments tray, add category tags, set up comment blocklists, trim their video replays and see their audio, battery and connectivity levels in a broadcaster status bar. Social media managers can also now draft Live video announcements for their celebrity clients to review, and send the star reminders to start broadcasting.

These features should reduce the anxiety of stars to go Live on camera by giving them more options to make themselves look their best. If Facebook can combine the urgency and intimacy of Live video with the production quality of recordings, it could inspire stars to fill the News Feed with one-of-a-kind content they can’t see on Twitter or Snapchat.

Here’s a breakdown of the features, and why they’ll be useful during broadcasts:

Facebook launched its Mentions app back in 2014 to give special treatment and features to professional content creators — something other apps likeSnapchat have refused to do. Facebook Live’s direct competitor Periscope has seen downloads fall off as its parent company Twitter struggles.

Periscope did recently launch Periscope Producer, which allows broadcasts from professional video equipment similar to Facebook’s Live API, but its app lacks many of the bonus features and controls found on Facebook.

Today’s updates could make Live videos look more polished. But that’s not the only kind of real-time content Facebook is pushing. In the last week it announcedLive 360andLive Audiobroadcasts, plusLive streaming from Oculus VRto News Feed. These are all in testing with limited partners before wider roll-outs next year. Facebook is betting big on the Live medium, but top content creators will need hand-holding to fill it with stuff worth watching.