Meet 6 weird new Pokemon from Pokemon Sun and Moon

[youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vKosBJ1Uko0]

Nintendo and The Pokemon Company have another game besides Pokemon Go that they want you to remember: Pokemon Sun and Moon. Since I loved Pokemon before it was about getting exercise and meeting new people, I’m very excited about Sun/Moon’s release on Nintendo 3DS, which happens November 18. But I’m struggling to remember if all new Pokemon in each sequel were as weird as these.

One of them is a flower crown from Coachella. Look:

There’s also this gem, which The Pokemon Company calls Wimpod. If my special ability was “Wimp Out,” I’d look like that too:

And here’s the full list of new Pokemon, straight from the horse’s mouth:

Name:Wimpod

Type:Bug/Water

Wimpod is the Turn Tail Pokémon. This Pokémon is a cowardly scavenger that eats or stores anything that’s been dropped in the sea meaning it is highly valued across the Alola region as a cleaner of the sea. Wimpod has the new Ability Wimp Out which causes this Pokémon to run away or swap out for another Pokémon when its HP drops below half in battle.

Name:Bounsweet

Type:Grass

Bounsweet is the Fruit Pokémon which gives off a delicious aroma. This aroma has a calming effect on humans, so many people across Alola let them live inside their homes as an air freshener.

Name:Comfey

Type:Fairy

The Posey Picker Pokémon Comfey picks flowers which it carries around with it. Comfey uses its soothing aroma to help treat people and Pokémon at Pokémon Centers and hospitals.

Name:Mudsdale

Type:Ground

Mudslade is the Draft Horse Pokémon with incredible power and stamina. Its legs are coated in a protective mud and its kick can destroy a car in a single blow. Mudslade has the Ability Stamina, a new Ability which raises a Pokémon’s Defense by one when hit by an attack.

Name:Bewear

Type:Normal/Fighting

Bewear is the Strong Arm Pokémon that must never be approached carelessly. With its strong and highly developed arms and legs, Bewear loves to give crushing bear hugs that will split anything in two.

Name:Mimikyu

Type:Ghost/Fairy

As the Disguised Pokémon, Mimikyu lives its life constantly covered by its cloth. Mimikyu’s Disguise Ability allows it to escape danger from an enemy’s attack once, then its appearance changes.

We’ve also got new details about gameplay features in Sun/Moon, including online interactions ranged through Pokemon Global Link, a website where players can link up for more multiplayer. Sun and Moon compatibility will unfortunately mark the end of support for older games in the series through Global Link, but the new games will support a new feature called Friendly Competitions, which lets any player host their own Pokemon tournament.

Two types of Friendly Competitions will be available, including “Online,” which watch opponents over the internet, and “Live,” which used QR codes generated and scanned by a player’s 3DS to link people for in-person conceptions.

Also new is Hyper Training, a feature which lets players continue to improve their Pokemon beyond level 100, by improving individual strengths and then training up your Pokemon through in-game character Mr. Hyper, who lives in the new Alola region that functions as the Sun/Moon world setting.