Four reasons you really shouldn’t miss Disrupt SF, kicking off one week from today

Disrupt SFstarts a week from today. There’s still time to get on board, and here are a few reasons why you might be sad if you don’t. You can stillget a ticket here.

#1Marc Andreessen,Marc Benioff,Diane Greene,Reid Hoffman,Sebastian Thrun.  If those names got your attention, so will these: the Warriors’ Steph Curry,  U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter,Sevenevesauthor Neal Stephenson, HBO’sSilicon Valleycreator Mike Judge, and Pokemon Go CEO John Hanke. We have robotics, with Melonee Wise (Fetch) and Marc Raibert (Boston Dynamics); we have health with Janica Alvarez (Naya Health), Deborah Anderson-Bialis (Fertility IQ) and Ida Tin (Clue); and we have so much much more over three full days of programming…Check out the full agenda here.

#2Startup Battlefield. Last month, two Battlefield winners,Vurb(Disrupt NY 2014) andBeam(Disrupt NY 2016), were acquired, the first by Snapchat and the second by Microsoft. To date, 76 contestants in TechCrunch’s startup competition have been acquired or gone public, and many more of the 610 Battlefield alums are on their way to big exits. Check out theBattlefield leaderboardto see all the great companies that launched on our stage. At Disrupt, attendees get a ringside seat to watch the latest Battlefield batch pitch to stellar judges to win the Disrupt Cup.

#3 Networking. There will be more than 5000 attendees at the show, almost all entrepreneurs, technologists, investors, and media. Finding old friends and discovering new ones is a challenge, so three things: the new Disrupt mobile app,CrunchMatch, and lots of gatherings, including some very focused ones.

Disrupt attendees can download the Disrupt app from the Google Play or Apple iTunes stores starting this Wednesday. It’s pre-populated with attendee and exhibitor information, features in-app messaging for attendees, and makes it easy to watch sessions missed on demand.

CrunchMatchis a program for investors looking to set up meetings with startups that match their interests. Hundreds of companies and startups are participating.

Then there are the After Parties on Monday and Tuesday night, as well as special receptions focused onChina,Artificial Intelligence startups, and AR/VR startups, and of courseSteph Curry’s specialNothing But Netsfundraiser.

#4.Startups, startups, startups. In addition to the Battlefield companies, more than 500 curated companies will exhibit on the floor over three days, a new batch each day. Check out the line-up at theStartup Alley hub. Thanks to CrunchMatch and the Disrupt app, it’s never been easier to find the right people and companies, though letting serendipity do her thing on walk down Startup Alley is always a good idea too.

Everyone comes away from Disrupt with great new ideas, insights and contacts.

Don’t miss out.Get your ticket today.