Just a few hours left to save big on Disrupt London tickets

Alright, procrastinators. You have just hours a few hours left to save £400 on tickets to the hottest startup show in Europe —Disrupt London 2016. Extra early-bird tickets are available now for just £800 apiece, or just £700 each when you purchase multiple tickets. Time is running out, so get on over toour ticketing pageto get your extra early bird tickets today.

At Disrupt, you’ll be able to attend a series of lectures and interviews with a truly incredible lineup of entrepreneurs, investors and innovators.

We still aren’t quite ready to announce this year’s speakers just yet, but past speakers have included the likes of footballer Thierry Henry, Passion Capital Partner Eileen Burbidge, and retired Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson, to name just a few.

After you’ve taken in the lectures, you’ll walk the Disrupt show floor as you chat with founders and other representatives of some of the top early-stage startups in the UK and around the world in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley.

Then, you’ll witness the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, where a dozen or so promising early-stage startups pitch our panel of judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup and a £30,000 grand prize.

Finally, after a long day of fun, what better way to unwind than by attending the after-parties that keep the good times going long after the show floor closes for the evening?

Of course, you’ll need a ticket to get in, so get an extra early-bird ticket for just £800 (or £700 with multiple tickets) now before the price increases on Saturday. Head on over to ourticketing pagetoday to get your deeply-discounted Disrupt tickets.

Disrupt London 2016 takes place December 5-6 at London’sbeautiful Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.