Two investors who like to shoot from the hip are at Disrupt London, next week

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6. That’s next week. Grab ticketshere. IN amongst our discussion about startups, investing and the future of tech, we are delighted to be joined by two outspoken investors. In many ways these two speakers are not afraid to counter the prevailing views of the time and have both gained reputations of being champions of entrepreneurs.

We’re calling this panel ‘A fist full of dollars’ to reflect its gun-slinging approach!

Elizabeth “Beezer” Clarkson is Managing Director of Sapphire Ventures. Beezer leads Sapphire Ventures’ investments in venture funds domestically and internationally. She began her career in financial services over 20 years ago at Morgan Stanley in its global infrastructure group. Since, she has held various direct and indirect venture investment roles, as well as operational roles in software business development at Hewlett-Packard. Most recently, Beezer managed the day-to-day operations of the Draper Fisher Jurvetson Global Network, which then had $7 billion under management across 16 venture funds worldwide.

In 2016, Beezer led the launch of OpenLP, an effort to help foster greater understanding in the entrepreneur-to-LP tech ecosystem. Additionally, she is a judge for 100&Change, a MacArthur Foundation competition that provides funding to solve critical challenges of our time. Beezer earned a BA in government from Wesleyan University, where she recently served on the board of trustees, and an MBA from Harvard Business School.

Fabrice Grinda is Co-Founder of FJ Labs. Fabrice is an Internet entrepreneur, angel investor, student and lover of life, aspiring Renaissance man and co-founder of FJ Labs, a venture investment firm and startup studio. Fabrice was also co-founder and CEO of OLX, the largest classifieds sites in the world.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You can get your tickets at this price until 5 December. This CyberMonday, we’re treating anyone who buys a General Admission pass to a gift worth up to $200 from theTechCrunch Gift Guide. Just choose your gift,buy your ticket, and presto, you’ve got one stuffed stocking.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.