Banks should not underestimate Facebook Messenger

Before you say that Facebook is no longer perceived as coolwith today’s youth, do you know what’s even less cool? Banks.

When you break down the numbers, coolness becomes less relevant. Because when it comes to user engagement, Facebook’s reigns supreme above all others.

WhatsApp hasexceeded 1 billion users, and Facebook Messenger reports900 million users, handling60 billion messages a daycombined — three times the number of traditional text messages.

The combination of chat and payments have already proven to be a great success, as exemplified by the launch ofFacebook Pay,Snapcash by Snapchat, WeChat’sintegrated paymentsolution andKakao PayinKakao Talkin South Korea.

However, the potential for chat apps in financial services is by no means limited to social payments. Facebook has already confirmed that they arepursuing Wechat’s success, venturing into eCommerce. This is only the beginning.

The introduction of chatbots on the Facebook messenger platform could revolutionize the way we look atrelationship banking.Digibank in India is based entirely on a chat interface, and allows its customers to do all their everyday banking needs through a chat interface.

Evenopening their initial bank account.By applyingmachine learningand natural language processing, the chat interface is able to handle a wide variety of everyday banking use-cases that was previously solved by navigating through user-unfriendly mobile banking apps or contacting customer service representatives.

Facebook messenger’s  chatbots will have a significant impact on banking, asa majority of banking services could be automatedthrough simple chat request like “what is my daily spending limit until my next paycheck” or “approve and pay my outstanding bills”. The impact of chatbots is not limited to simple daily banking requests. AJ Bell is aiming to utilize Facebookchatbots to offer trading servicesfor investors, as well as Personetics thatdelivers personalized financial guidanceto customers everywhere through their AI-powered chatbot.

The bots for messenger platform represent a unprecedented opportunity for incumbents to increase customer engagement. Banks are in possession of vast amount of user data that is invaluable for unsupervised machine learning as well as intangible know-how through years of experience for supervised machine learning.

Chat apps andvirtual assistantsis predicted to be the future of user interaction, and may evenreplace traditional web browsersand traditional onlinesearch as we know it. Banks should not underestimate the disruptive power of chat apps. Remember, it was a banker who once said: The horse is here to stay, but the automobile is only a novelty – a fad.