Startup Battlefield application deadline extended for Disrupt SF

Attention startup hopefuls: It’s time to stop procrastinating andapply for the Startup Battlefieldat Disrupt SF. Startups from across the US and around the world have until 12pm PT on July 5th to get your application in front of the selection team.Apply now!

For those who aren’t yet familiar, the Startup Battlefield is a world-renowned startup competition. It’s like the gymnastics portion of the Summer Olympics. It’s like March Madness for tech geeks. It’s quite literally the inspiration for HBO’s Silicon Valley.

Look, we get it, you’re super busy. Maybe you’ve been working extra hard to push out new features to your users, find the perfect hire or scout office space. Maybe you just forgot when the actual deadline was. Whatever the reason, TechCrunch is giving you another chance tosubmit your application.

So, why should you compete in the Startup Battlefield? For starters, you’ll get to present your company to the best and brightest entrepreneurs and investors in the world who will give you incredible feedback on how to make your product or service even better.

Startup Battlefield participants also receive free demo space in Startup Alley, tickets to VIP events, a Battlefield-only reception and, of course, TechCrunch swag. Prior to the event, startups work with TechCrunch editors to hone and polish their pitches.

Since 2007,the 610 Battlefield companieshave raised more than $6.1 billion after appearing on the TechCrunch stage, and 76 have exited. Our alumni include household names like Fitbit, Venmo, Postmates andmany others.

And the best part? There are absolutely no fees, equity or otherwise, to participate in the Startup Battlefield. Sounds pretty good, huh? Go ahead, we’ll wait.Submit an application today.

All verticals are welcome, including (but not limited to) biotech, security, drones, supercomputing, e-commerce, on-demand services, greentech, edtech, mobile consumer, healthcare, enterprise software, bitcoin, hardware, AI, dev tools and VR. Startups from around the world are encouraged to apply!

Disrupt SF will take place September 12-14 at Pier 48. Full details on eligibility can be foundhere.

Building a great company encompasses much more than a strong launch, but, in our humble opinion, it doesn’t hurt to come out of the gate strong. Applications are now open through July 5th at 12pm PT. To apply, head on over to ourStartup Battlefield page.