Come hear GoEuro’s CEO talk trains, planes and automobiles at Disrupt London

Travel and transportation have always been major focus points for the tech world. Why? Because people will always want to get from points A to B, and to do it faster and cheaper than before.GoEuro— a startup based out of Berlin — is a company to watch here because it straddles both of these industries. Come hear how GoEuro is doing this — and making a success of it — when its CEO Naren Shaam takes to the stage in a fireside chat next month, at TechCrunch’s Disrupt London event, December 5-6.

Like other travel portals, GoEuro’s focus is on helping people plan their travel and book their tickets. Uniquely, to find the answer, GoEuro offers a special twist: it presents an aggregated view of all possible routes to get there — be it by plane, train or bus — to figure out what might be fastest, and what will cost the least.

It’s a very European solution to a global challenge, and is all the more interesting when you consider that the founder (pictured, right) is from the U.S. — yet building his startup (and raising tons of money) out of Berlin.

This, combined with the tech that GoEuro has built, makes for an interesting company that has a lot of potential in the years ahead, not just in Europe but the rest of the world.

Come join us in London to hear about how GoEuro is going places.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece.You can get your tickets at this priceuntil 4 November.

And for all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.