Relay Ventures has a fresh $150 million to invest

Relay Ventures,a 10-year-old, Toronto- and Menlo Park-based early-stage venture firm, has closed its third fund with $150 million in commitments. It had closed its previous fund with the same amount in 2012.

You might rememberRelay was once knownas ATP Capital and oversaw three other brands: JLA Ventures, Clairmont Capital, and BlackBerry Partners Fund.

The firm is also known in venture circles for its longstanding “mobile only” approach — even as mobile has come to mean everything to the firm from consumer healthcare, digital education, commerce, Internet of Things and connected cars.

Whatever its strategy, its investors — most of them in Canada, where the firm got its start and where Relay continues to invest, as well as in the U.S. — like what they’re seeing. Managing partner Kevin Talbot says three-quarters of its limited partners returned from its last fund.

Another highlight that Talbot is proud of: with $670 million under management, Relay is now the largest venture fund manager in Canada, he says.

Like plenty of investors in both countries, Relay has a lot promising portfolio companies yet to exit. Among them Toronto-basedEcobee, which makes Wi-Fi enabled smart thermostats for residential and commercial applications andhas Nest in its sights. The company has raised roughly $50 million from investors; it hasn’t disclosed its valuation. Another interesting bet:PubNub, a San Francisco startup that has built a data network focused on messaging for apps, IoT hardware and other low-latency services. The company has raised $46 million to date.

Relay has also seem some exits, including the sale of Achievers, a 20-year-old maker of employee engagement software thatsoldlast year for $110 million to publicly traded Blackhawk Network; the ad tech company Millennial Media, which slipped in value following a 2012 IPO and wasacquiredlast year by (TechCrunch parent) AOL; the smart calendar startup Tempo,acquiredby Salesforce; and the video ad company mDialogue,acquiredby Google.

Relay has already begun investing its new fund. Some of its newest bets include British Columbia-basedFreshGrade, which provides classroom communication and assessments for K-12 education;7shifts, a Saskatoon-based startup that makes workforce scheduling software for the restaurant industry; and the 10-month-old, Montreal-based messaging and bot companyAutomat.ai.

Pictured, left to right: Firm cofounders John Albright and Kevin Talbot.