Come hear Ole Harms on Volkswagen’s future of mobility

The automotive industry is now  shifting into high gear to win in the next generation of mobility services — whether that involves building a great connected car, leading in the world autonomous driving technology, or playing a central role in the car ownership models of the future. This December, at TechCrunch Disrupt in London, come hear how Volkswagen, the world’s biggest car maker,is now striving for a strong position in the mobility business of the future.

Led by Ole Harms (pictured, above), executive director for new business and mobility, VW’s efforts in new cars and new car services is seeing the company move into some interesting areas.

To set a stake into the world of ride-hailing, earlier this year, theVolkswagen Groupinvested $300 millionin Gett — one of the many companies taking on Uber in on-demand transportation. VW also projects that itsfirst fully-electric carswill start to get made in 2020, taking on the likes of Tesla with a model priced in the $20,000-$30,000 range. And it’slooking hard at Silicon Valleyand more investments into companies there to build out its autonomous driving tech.

At Disrupt, we’ll be talking to Harms about the challenges and opportunities in the space, and what VW Group is planning next. Be prepared for some exciting news that you won’t want to miss.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece.You can get your tickets at this priceuntil 4 November.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.