Hardware Battlefield Alum Health2Sync raises $3 million Series A round

When it comes to keeping track of diabetes, the manual process can be a bit of a pain. Healthtech startupHealth2Sync, whichlaunched at the Hardware Battlefield at CES 2014, wants to change all that with a cheap accessory that connects to most standard glucose meters and syncs your blood glucose levels straight to your phone.

The company announced today it has secured a $3 million Series A round led byWI Harper Group, with participation in the round byCherubic Ventures,iSeed VenturesandSparkLabs Global Ventures.

According to the company’s press release, Health2Sync will use the funding to continue product development and accelerate growth overseas in markets like Japan, China and Southeast Asia.

At its core, the Health2Sync is a cable that connects your smartphone to your glucose meter via the headphone jack to get the two devices talking. Once these devices are connected, data stored on your glucose meter will sync with your smartphone via the Health2Sync app.

The app is available for both Android and iOS and the cable comes in two varieties — one for legacy glucose meters, and another for more modern meters that transmit data via infrared.

In addition to displaying the data both numerically and graphically, users of the Health2Sync app can add family members so these loved ones can help them manage their diabetes. It also lets you send data to your physician and diabetic educator so these professional caregivers can do the same.

And the company claims it gets results. According to a press release, the average HbA1c levels of patients dropped from 8.6 percent to 6.89 percent in patients who had been using Health2Sync for 120 days, which led to significant drops in the risk of health complications in these patients.

Patients are typically considered to be in control when HbA1c levels are at or below 7-8 percent,according to Mayo Clinic.

With an additional $3 million in the bank, Health2Sync should be able to make advances in their technology that help people take better control of their diabetes, especially in areas like Japan, China and Southeast Asia that the company is targeting.

We can’t wait to see how they do. We also can’t wait to see the next round of future success stories in the Battlefield atDisrupt SF 2016, which takes place in just a few short weeks, September 12-14 at San Francisco’s Pier 48.