Only a few days left to save £250 on Disrupt London tickets

Disrupt London 2016 is literally right around the corner — just a few short days until thousands of investors, innovators and enthusiasts descend on London for the best startup show in Europe. You have just 4 days left to get Disrupt tickets at the early-bird price of just £950 apiece.

You can get anearly-bird Disrupt ticket here.

That ticket serves as your all-access pass to TechCrunch Disrupt, where you can hear fromour amazing lineup of entrepreneurs, innovators and investorswho will dole out some serious knowledge in a series of interviews and lectures throughout the show.

You’ll hear from some of the best and brightest minds in the business — people like Station F Director Roxanne Varza, Gett Founder and CEO Shahar Waiser, DeepMind Technologies co-founder Mustafa Suleyman, Invoke Capital founder Michael Lynch, Passion Capital Partner Eileen Burbidge and Crowdpac co-founder and CEO Steve Hilton, to name a few.

The full agenda can be foundhere.

Next, when you aren’t taking in the lectures, you can chat with reps from hundreds of promising early-stage startups displaying their wares in the Startup Alley and Hardware Alley.

Then, you’ll get to check out all the hot startups competing in the Startup Battlefield competition, trying to win the coveted Disrupt Cup, the $50,000 (about £40,000) grand prize and, perhaps most importantly, the attention of the tech community at large.

Finally, what better way to unwind than by attending the many parties and after-parties that take place during Disrupt and keep the good times going long after the show floor closes up for the evening?

But you won’t be able to do any of it if you don’t have a ticket, and the best way to get a ticket is to do it now before the price jumps by £250 at the door on December 5.

You can get your discounted early-bird tickets to Disrupt London 2016here.

Disrupt takes place December 5-6 at London’s beautiful Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you all there in a few days.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.