Announcing the Disrupt London Hackathon sponsor prizes, and last chance for tickets

This year’s TechCrunch Disrupt London Hackathon is set to be the best yet. We’re mere days away from the main event and are bursting with excitement.

As we’ve been releasing information about the event this week, we wanted to whet our hacker’s appetites with details about spectator tickets, our sponsors, and their awesome prizes.

The last round of tickets for hackathon participants is available now, so go quick andget registered.

Grab a seat to watch the culmination of all the hard work our hackers put in over the weekend. Today, we’re releasing spectator tickets to watch the presentations of the hack projects on Sunday, 4 December. These are for those who aren’t hacking but want to watch the hacks and winners. You can register for a spectator tickethere.

Our sponsors have provided some amazing prizes. Check out these contests running at the hackathon:

Amazon Alexa

Best use of Amazon Alexa in a voice user experience. The winning team will receive an Echo for each team member (up to four).

CiscoCome hack withCisco Spark! Cisco Spark APIs are RESTful. Send messages, add people, create bots, use the webhooks to build a unique integration.

Prize:Best use of Cisco’s cloud collaboration APIs will win USD $4,000 cash prize.

Have a great idea on how you can build with Watson? Exercise your skills and creativity by creating a cognitive app using Watson services. Leverage the latest in self-learning technology. Participate in the IBM Watson category to:

Prize: Win an Apple Watch Sport (each member of the winning, team up to five members) for the best use of the IBM Watson APIs.

PubNub

-Your current location animates live on the map, just like in the book.

-The user should be able to turn their visibility on or off.

Prize: $2.5K cash, $2.5K PubNub credit

Reach RoboticsWe have just launched the world’s first gaming robots are MekaMon.com. The robots are pre-SDK and we are interested in the types of SDK use cases that developers want around. Hacks should be centred around robot IR communication, kinematics and locomotion, Mobile platform AR tracking.

Radix

Win $5,000 by using a Radix Domain name for your hackathon project. Choose from .TECH, .STORE, .ONLINE, .SPACE, .SITE, .HOST, .PRESS and .WEBSITE – All Domains names are FREE for Hackathon Participants – Mention your domain name on stage during judging – Radix Domain should be the primary domain for hosting your project

Techfugees

The winning team of the Techfugees challenge will be granted a year of TechHub membership, consisting of access to workspace, a network of like-minded people across 7 global hubs & a growth support programme (that helps startups throughout the whole cycle, from MVP to exit).

TwilioThe best use of Twilio’s API will score you $200-$500 for each member of the team.