Uber teams with Sears on new rewards program for drivers and riders

Uber todayannouncedyet another rewards program for its drivers and riders, this time in partnership with retailer Sears and its “Shop Your Way” loyalty platform. The program offers drivers points redeemable for products at Sears, Kmart and Lands’ End, as well as discounts on vehicle maintenance and repairs at Sears Auto Centers. Meanwhile, riders who sign up will earn the chance to earn points by using Uber, as well as win more points through an ongoing sweepstakes.

The deal is the latest in a series of reward-focused partnerships for the ride-hailing company, which has been looking to increase the benefits associated with choosing Uber over rivals. More recently, Uber haspartnered with Capital One, to offer free rides through a Payment Rewards program,andteamed up with Visa to offer free rides in exchange for spending at local businesses, for example.

Today, Uber says that drivers who sign up for Shop Your Way (via shopyourway.com/uber) can earn up to $1,000 in Shop Your Way points, though the exact amount of the award may vary by market. These points are redeemable as merchandise credits at the aforementioned retailers and on the shopyourway.com website, where you can browse the products online.

In addition – and what may be the biggest benefit of all – Uber drivers who link up with the program will receive half off their oil changes and 30% back in points on all labor at Sears Auto Centers.

U.S. riders can join the program, too, though with fewer benefits. Instead of a sign-up bonus, they will receive an entry in a $10,000 Shop Your Way sweepstakes for each ride taken. Plus, every month, 1,000 winners will receive a prize of $10 in Shop Your Way points.

However, riders in Chicago and New York have a better deal: they’ll earn $2 in points per ride, says Uber, as part of the company’s larger Rider Rewards program. This program will eventually expand nationwide.

Shop Your Way has been the focus of Sears’ attempt at turning around itsdeclining revenues, and the company had said that it accounted for 75% of sales during the first half of the year. However, Sears hasmore recently admittedthat the loyalty program wasn’t working to right the business – that is, it wasn’t getting people to spend enough money.

While Shop Your Way has a large number of registered members – roughly in the “tens of millions” –  many are not that active, nor are they frequent buyers. Through the Uber partnership, Sears seems to be hoping for an increase in sign-ups, and a way to boost members’ usage, by giving them ongoing chances to earn and win points that could then lead to purchases.