User’s Guide to Disrupt London 2016

Hard to believe that Disrupt London starts tomorrow! Check out this guide for helpful event info.

We want you to have a successful experience at Disrupt. Check out these tips to have a great day.

Official Disrupt Mobile App:Make sure to download the latest Disrupt app to connect and message with other attendees at Disrupt, check out exhibitors and peruse the agenda. (Note: You can only hear from other attendees if you have the app and sign in with your ticket info. So get the app and don’t miss out on people who may be trying to message you right now!)

The free app is available onApple’s App StoreandGoogle Play. Check out thisquick videoon how to use the App and make sure to enable push button notifications to get updates during the conference!

Registration:Universe is the official ticketing platform of Disrupt. If you purchased a ticket, you usedUniverse. We love them and we think you will, too. If you haven’t purchased a ticket, please go do thatnow!

TechCrunch Store:You’ve asked and we heard you. We’re bringing the enormously popular TechCrunch Store across the pond to Disrupt London! Get exclusive, high-quality TechCrunch gear at the TechCrunch Booth. If you’re not able to make it, check out our items online attechcrunchstore.com!

Official Hackathon Platform:DevPost reprised its role at the Disrupt Hackathon, providing the platform for ourwiki. Thanks, y’all!

FREE RIDE SHARE SERVICEGettis inviting all Disrupt London attendees to a private, exclusive launch of their revolutionary new service – Gett Together, free transport to and from Disrupt London via Stratford Station and nearby hotels. No need to walk to the venue in the cold. Ride forFREEto and from the event along pre-set routes that pass through the following locations:

Holiday Inn Express – Stratford

Times of operation:Morning route to Disrupt:Monday 5 and Tuesday 6 December,7.30-10.30am.Evening route back from Disrupt:Monday5.00-8.00pm,Tuesday4.00-7.00pm.

NOTES:Rides are not available between10.30am and 5.00pmon Mondayand10.30am and 4.00pmon Tuesday. Gett Together staff will be on hand to help you at Stratford Station and across all listed locations.

To book your free rides just follow the instructions below orwatch this helpful video.

With so much happening at Disrupt, make sure to check out some special events and features.

Fintech, Health/Biotech & Artificial Intelligence Events:

At noon, five curated Fintech and Health/Biotech startups (Monday) and five AI startups (Tuesday) will demo on the Showcase Stage in the heart of Startup Alley. You can check out the exhibiting companies on Monday, adjacent to the Disrupt Showcase Stage.

Watch us on the web:If you’re an arm-chair Disruptor, you can watch the conference action from theTechCrunch homepage.

See you tomorrow!