Twitter now lets you broadcast live video from its mobile apps

Twitter users will now be able to broadcast live video directly from their mobile apps, thanks to tighter integration with live streaming service Periscope, the companiesannouncedthis morning. Through updated iOS and Android applications, rolling out shortly, you’ll be able to tap a “LIVE” button directly from the compose screen where you write tweets, in order to launch the camera and start your live video.

Sinceacquiring Periscope early last year, Twitter has been working to make live streaming a more prominent part of its social media platform. Already, Twitter made it possible to watch Periscope broadcasts within the Twitter stream, without needing to launch a second app. It also introduced a new type of alert that would notify you whensomeone you followed began live streaming, and it launchedprofessional-level toolsthat allow users to stream directly to Twitter from high-end cameras, VR headsets and other equipment.

Twitter also has been working to bring live broadcasts to Twitter for some time. This spring, for example, thecompany began testing this “Go Live” button in its Android application, noting that it would eventually roll out similar functionality to all Twitter users.

https://twitter.com/twitter/status/809035848138178562

Once you’re live, people can join the video just as they can on Periscope. They can comment on the video or send reactions (hearts) to show their support. Having the Periscope app pre-installed is not required.

The launch comes at a time when the major social media companies are vying to become the de facto home for live video on the web by rolling out new features at a rapid pace.

Googlerecently announcedsupport for 4K live streaming on YouTube, for example, and Facebook this weekannounced plans to make live 360 video available to everyonestarting next year. And Instagram justlaunchedlive video Stories to compete with Snapchat.

Twitter is a bit behind, having just now fully integrated going live into its mobile applications.

“We started Periscope because we wanted to give people the superpower to share live video with an audience. Bringing this capability directly into the Twitter app is an important step because it brings that superpower to the hundreds of millions of people who use Twitter,” said Kayvon Beykpour, CEO of Periscope, in a statement. “Twitter’s already the place where people go to see what’s happening. With this update, anyone can now broadcast what’s happening live.”

The company says the new feature will reach all users on iOS and Android in the coming days.