Disrupt London 2016 returns to the Copper Box Arena

Disrupt London 2016is fast approaching, and we’re thrilled to announce that we all had such a great time last year that this year’s show is returning to the fabulous Copper Box Arena in Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.

The Copper Box Arena was built to accommodate the 2012 Summer Olympic games in London. It was originally called the Handball Arena, since it was going to be primarily used for the handball competition in the games, but was renamed in January 2012 to reflect that the arena would be used for more than just handball.

It was renamed the Copper Box Arena because, well, it looks pretty much exactly like a giant copper box.

Since the Olympics, the 7,000-plus-seat venue has been converted into a multi-sport arena for community use for things like music, comedy, entertainment, health and fitness, sport, conferences and exhibitions — and, of course, TechCrunch Disrupt.

The venue hosts some of London’s prominent sports teams, including the London Lions basketball team, the London GD Handball Club and the Leyton Netball Club, and has hosted events like the Invictus Games for wounded and disabled servicemen and women and the Grand Prix of Badminton.

We are excited to once again be calling the Copper Box Arena home for Disrupt London 2016, and we can’t wait for you all to join us for the best startup conference in Europe. Disrupt London kicks off with the hackathon on December 3 and 4, followed by the main conference on December 5 and 6.

We still have several tickets available for the show at extra early-bird prices, and you can get in on the action by purchasing your tickethere.

And, of course, we will have slots available for startups to participate in Startup and Hardware Alley, where dozens of the best hardware and software startups in Europe connect with like-minded entrepreneurs, investors and attendees. You can sign up to participate in the Alley by purchasing an Alley tickethere.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.