Mustafa Suleyman, co-founder of DeepMind, to speak at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! Not long now! Grab ticketshere. As well as Startup Alley and Battlefield, we have a tonne of amazing speakers coming. Today we’re delighted to say Mustafa Suleyman, the co-founder and Head of Applied AI at DeepMind, is coming.

Mustafa is responsible for the application of DeepMind’s technology to real-world problems, as part of DeepMind’s commitment to use intelligence to make the world a better place. In February 2016 he launched DeepMind Health, which builds clinician-led technology in the NHS. Mustafa was Chief Product Officer before DeepMind was bought in 2014 by Google in their largest European acquisition to date. At 19, Mustafa dropped out of Oxford University to help set up a telephone counseling service, building it to become one of the largest mental health support services of its kind in the UK, and then worked as policy officer for then Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone. He went on to help start Reos Partners, a consultancy with seven offices across four continents specializing in designing and facilitating large-scale multi-stakeholder ‘Change Labs’ aimed at navigating complex problems. As a skilled negotiator and facilitator Mustafa has worked across the world for a wide range of clients such as the UN, the Dutch Government and WWF.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Early bird tickets are now available to purchasefor the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You can get your tickets at this price until 4 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.