Watch Pitch@Palace’s Demo Day here

TechCrunch is pleased to bring you Pitch@Palace’s Demo Day today,Friday 14 October, from 09.30 GMT+1, live from the Harwell Science and Innovation Campus.

Pitch@Palace was set up by The Duke of York to amplify and accelerate U.K. tech entrepreneurs. At Pitch@Palace Boot Camp, 31 teams will give a three-minute pitch. Judges will then select the 12-15 best startups to pitch at St. James’s Palace to an invited audience of high-profile investors and key business leaders.

Startups span many verticals, including media, fintech, edtech, data analytics and energy and environmental technologies. Tune in Friday at 9.30am GTM+1 to catch all the action.

(In order of appearance)

Automated Intelligence Limited– AI provides information management software and services that enable organisations to easily transition to, and make the most of, cloud technologies.

Digi.Me– Digi.me returns personal data to the individual for their own insight and benefit and to allow apps/businesses to access rich data with consent for mutual benefit.

Flock– Flock is a big data-driven artificial intelligence platform for drone-flight risk reduction. We make drones safe and smart in congested urban environments.

Satavia– Satavia is a data analytics and visualisation company that develops environmental awareness solutions for aviation.

TouchByte Ltd. – We provide real-time customer insight, recognition and validation of “PEOPLE in PLACES” using face recognition technology.

DoodleMaths– DoodleMaths is a tablet-based, adaptive and intuitive maths learning programmefor 4-14-year-olds. Progress and motivation grow in just 10 minutes a day.

NFC Helps Me Limited– How Do I? teaches life and vocational skills through step-by-step videos linked to the learning environment using NFC technology.

Cumulus Energy Storage LTD– Cumulus Energy Storage is enabling renewable electricity — by developing the lowest cost, grid-level energy storage batteries using Copper/Zinc technology.

Drenched Ltd. – Invented a product for taps which allows you to wash your hands with only 2 tablespoons of water and uses no energy for heating of water.

Mobile Power Ltd. – Our aim is to provide clean, affordable energy to the off-grid market in Africa, particularly the half a billion mobile phone users living off-grid.

Senergy Innovations – Senergy Innovations are bringingto market the world’s first nanocomposite solar thermal panels that willdeliver affordable solar heating and cooling.

AID:Tech– AID:Tech brings transparency and real-time analysis to the distribution of resources by governments, NGOs and charities.

RiskSave– An end to financial advice charges, to restore faith in the finance industry and engage the financially excluded, RiskSave aims to manage retail assets for free.

Inductosense– Embeddable sensors, systems and analytics for fast, repeatable, through-life detection of cracks, corrosion or defects in structures.

Baby2Body– We help new and nearly moms live better — by giving them the information and motivation they need to live happily and healthily, on the exact day they need it.

Codec– We use AI to understand what content an audience wants a brand or publisher to make, before they make it.

Inkpact– Inkpact provides growing businesses personal communications at scale, providing messages handwritten by humans to engage customers, making a lasting impression.

Landmrk– Landmrk is a flexible white-label platform that enables you to deliver digital content to your audience at specific physical locations.

Lobster– Lobster is the world’s own place to source photo and video from social media users directly.

Prison Voicemail– A social venture using scalable technology to improve communication channels between prisoners and their families.

Rezonence– Providing publishers a frictionless micropayment strategy where consumers pay for content with their time and attention by engaging with FreeWall adverts.

Swytch– Swytch is a revolutionary mobile operator that works alongside your existing operator, providing amazing features such as multiple mobile numbers on one phone.

Twile– A timeline of everything that’s happened in your family, from your earliest ancestors right through to today.

3D Industries Limited– The Google of 3D. A spatial intelligence engine that is ordering the emerging AR/VR 3D world.

SafeToNet LTD– Next generation parental controls using behavioral analytics and AI to protect families online.

PROWLER.io Limited– PROWLER.io is building self-learning, tuneable and controllable AI-bots for autonomous decision-making.

WaveOptics– WaveOptics has developed augmented reality technology that fuses incredible image quality with lightness and manufacturing scalability, creating immersive augmented reality that is viable and accessible.

Action.ai– Action.ai’s mission is to provide a high-quality route into the Smart Chatbot market. The company aims to be the e-commerce platform for the smart chatbot space.

Do-It Solutions Ltd. – Personalised assessment and screening accessible system which provides solutions to barriers to education and employment and criminal justice system.

EasyVideo– EasyVideo; ‘how to’ videos for learning disabilities on any mobile device — simply scan household items to find out how to use them.

JumPack Ltd. – JumPack is an innovative portable, wearable jump ramp for use by extreme sports athletes engaged in BMX, MTB, skateboarding, snowboarding and stunt scooters.