What the heck is Station F? Find out from Roxanne Varza at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on 5-6 December. Seen the HBO/Sky show “Silicon Valley”? Yes, this is the real-life version. But unlike the show, this can catapult startups into the stratosphere. And we have amazing content and speakers to match the startups you’ll see launched. Today we’re delighted to say Roxanne Varza is also joining.

Varza is the Director of Station F, which claims it will be the largest startup campus worldwide.

Prior to her current role, Roxanne was the lead for Microsoft’s start-up activities in France, running both Bizspark and Microsoft Ventures programs for 3 years.

Business Insider listed her as one of the top 30 women under 30 in tech. She has also been listed in additional rankings by Business Insider, Vanity Fair and Le Figaro, The Evening Standard and more.

Prior to Microsoft she worked for several European startups and was the former Editor of TechCrunch France. Roxanne has also contributed to other publications, including The Telegraph, The Kernel, Betakit and Business Insider.

Roxanne also co-founded StartHer (ex Girls in Tech Paris) and is the co-organizer of the Failcon Paris conference. More recently, she co-founded Tech.eu, a European tech media backed by Dave McClure, Adeo Ressi, Daniel Waterhouse and more.

Prior to TechCrunch, Roxanne worked for the French government’s foreign direct investment agency helping fast-growing startups develop their activities in France. Roxanne has spoken, moderated, mentored and judged numerous startup events and programs throughout Europe and also helps European startups with content and communications.

Roxanne is trilingual and holds degrees from UCLA, Sciences Po Paris and the London School of Economics. She is also an epilepsy advocate.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs 5-6 December in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy Early Bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

If you want to display your company, then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand new CrunchMatch program where we match startups to investors.Check it all out here.

Early Bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. Youcan get your tickets at this priceuntil 4 November.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.