Paranoid Fan wants to make sure you’re ready for football this season

The 2016 National Football League season is set to kick off tonight. Thousands of fans will be navigating parking, food and bathroom lines, finding their seats and attempting to meet up with friends. It’s not uncommon for fans to spend 30+ minutes not watching the game and instead wandering around the stadium in search of a reasonable beer line.

EnterParanoid Fan. The TechCrunch1st and Futurefinalist aims to help fans navigate their game-day experience by combining geolocation and user input to create the only real-time map of the stadium and surrounding areas. Paranoid Fan calls itself the “Waze of Sports Venues.”

To kick off this NFL season, Paranoid Fan is announcing their partnerships with the Atlanta Falcons and Jacksonville Jaguars. Falcons and Jaguars fans will be able to access the Paranoid Fans stadium maps directly from the team apps.

One of the more interesting features of Paranoid Fan is that users can both post and find watch parties where like-minded fans are gathering to watch the game. An in-app chat helps people at the game connect with each other.

Sponsors also see value in the application to promote on-site activation efforts — like a Red Bull giveaway in “Tent C.”

For those of you outside Jacksonville and Atlanta, Paranoid Fan has gone ahead and mapped out all 32 NFL stadiums and surrounding areas. By downloading the app, fans of all 32 teams can locate tailgate spots, music stages, parking lots, bars and other local points of interest near the stadium, and get the party going before and after the big game.

To get to points of interests, Paranoid Fan users can request a ride to these locations via Uber from right within the app.

You can learn more about the serviceon the company’s site, and you can download the iOS app to try it out for yourselfhere.

We’re thrilled that Paranoid Fan is getting into the game in some great new ways this season, and we can’t wait to see what the next great batch of startups have in store for us atDisrupt SF 2016, which takes place September 12-14  at Pier 48 in San Francisco.