Weekly Roundup: Verizon buys Yahoo, WikiLeaks publishes DNC emails and Skully crashes

Yahoo finally found a buyer, Mobileye and Tesla broke up, and some of the largest tech companies reported quarterly earnings. These are the biggest tech stories of the week. You can now get the Weekly Roundupsent straight to your inbox, delivered Saturday mornings.

1.Verizon (which owns AOL, which owns TechCrunch) announced it is acquiringYahoo’s core business for $4.83 billion in cash. This includes Yahoo’s advertising, content, search and mobile activities. It’s crazy to think that in 2000,Yahoo was worth a whopping $125 billion. If you won the last computing platform and are on the cusp of the next one you’re not built for, youmightwant to sell your company. It’s easier to pivot than make a comeback, after all.

2.Major tech companies reported earnings this week, and the highlights are as follows.Facebook smashed its Q2 earnings, hitting 1.7 billion users and a record share price.Apple’s stock jumped 7%after the company reported solid earnings.Verizon missed on declining salesof $30.5 billion.Twitter stock dove after a mixed report, and poor user growth continued.GoPro sales beat investor expectationsbut are still in steep decline.Alphabet beat expectations, boosting its shares by 5%.Amazon shattered expectationswith $30.4 billion in revenue.

3.Once promisingAR motorcycle helmet startup Skully is no longer. We discovered that the company’s shutdown will leave several vendors and Skully’s manufacturer Flextronics with unpaid bills andat least50 full-time employees out of a job. It’s unclear if any of the vendors will be paid.

4.Oracle made a$9.3 billion acquisition of cloud services company NetSuite. It’s clear now that Oracle is serious about growing cloud computing revenue, butthis wasn’t always the case.

5.WikiLeaks published a searchable database of19,252 DNC-related emailspacked with personal and financial information. Following the leak, Florida congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz announcedshe will be stepping down from her roleas the head of the Democratic National Committee after the end of the event.

6.Republican Presidential nomineeDonald Trump participated in a Reddit AMA, managing to answer 13 questions on topics ranging from NASA to media bias.In a separate facepalm-inducing moment, Trump invited Russia (yes, the entire country of Russia)to hack into Hillary Clinton’s inboxand release “the 30,000 e-mails that are missing.” Yikes.

7.During their earnings call,MobileEye announced that it will no longer provide Tesla with its self-driving automotive techbeyond EyeQ3, the processor currently used in Tesla vehicles. It is unclear whether Tesla or Mobileye ended the relationship, but Mobileye investors aren’t happy about the split.

8.Upthere, a new company from Apple and Oracle vets, came out of beta with $77 million in funding. The company believes that cloud storage should be your primary storage and not just a place for keeping backups. It’s now generally available for OS X/MacOS, Android and iOS.

9.Xiaomi announced its first laptop, and it sure does look familiar.The Mi Notebook Aircomes in two sizes — 13.3-inch and 12.5-inch — running Windows with a full-HD display, full-metal body and type-C USB charging and two USB slots. The Macbook Air rival will come as cheap as $540.

10.Amazon debuted adedicated shop for Kickstarter projects. Amazon is now hosting 300 successful Kickstarter products across a variety of categories, now all available for purchase.

11.Uber cofounder and CEO of Expa Studios Garrett Camp unveiledExpa’s latest project, Haus.Haus is a real estate play that focuses on digitizing the discovery, buying and selling of residential property.