Bioscience meets AI — Dr. Jackie Hunter of BenevolentAI to speak at Disrupt London

Disrupt hits LondonDecember 5-6 and it is our pleasure to announce that Dr. Jackie Hunter, Board Director of BenevolentAI and CEO of BenevolentBio, will be joining us as one of our featured speakers.

Dr. Jackie Hunter leadsBenevolentAI, a company at the intersection of bioscience and artificial intelligence working toward the powerful union between humans, technology and bioscience using AI. BenevolentAI’s mission is to accelerate global scientific discovery by turning the world’s highly fragmented scientific information into new insight and usable knowledge that ultimately benefits society.

In addition to her role as Board Director of BenevolentAI and CEO of BenevolentBio, Dr. Jackie Hunter is currently a member of the Governing Board of the University of Hertfordshire and was previously on the Governing Board of Royal Holloway and Bedford College, University of London.

She received a CBE in Queen’s Birthday Honours list for Services to the Pharmaceutical Industry and was awarded the 2010 Women of Achievement in Science, Engineering and Technology (SET). In 2012 she was elected as a fellow of the British Pharmacological Society and in 2013 was honored to receive a Personal Chair in Life Sciences Innovation from St. Georges Hospital Medical School.

TechCrunch’s two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield, where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy tickets for Disrupt London here.

Apply with your new startup for Battlefield for free here. The deadline has been extended until October 13th. There’s also theStartup Battlefield Scholarship Fundfor startups who need a bit of help with travel costs.

General admission tickets are still available and there’s special pricing for students. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT. We ask you senda copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card, to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.