Six new Sun and Moon Pokémon evolutions revealed

[youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQ4I_0DP4fc&w=680]

Pokémon Sun and Moon’s release for 3DS rapidly approaches, and the Pokémon Company is unveiling eight new Pokémon unique to the new games, including six evolutions of Sun/Moon characters and two Alola-region variants of existing pocket monsters.

The new Pokémon include two evolutions of a new dragon/fighting type that looks like a good candidate for inclusion in my primary lineup of six. There’s also a Silvally which is the evolved form of the artificially created Type: Null Pokémon, which seems like a very flexible party member since it can change its base Type using only a held item.

Pokémon Sun and Moon come out November 18 in North America, and a special demo preview will be available via the Nintendo eShop starting on October 18 in case you want an early look.

Here are the descriptions of the new Pokémon revealed today in full:

SilvallyType: NormalThe Synthetic Pokémon Silvally is the evolution of Type: Null. This Pokémon changes its type when exclusive items are inserted into the drive on its head, and its somatic cells mutate and glow with different colors of light depending on its type. Silvally has the new Ability RKS System, which causes this Pokémon to change type when holding specific type-related items. It also has the exclusive move Multi-Attack, an attack which changes depending on which type-related item it is holding.

Hakamo-oType: Dragon-FightingHakamo-o is the Evolution of Jangmo-o. Hakamo-o dance before battle to show their strength, clanging their scales together. A solitary Pokémon that enjoys training alone, its scales are often torn off, but they grow back nearly immediately. Hakamo-o view the number of lost scales as proof of how ferociously they have fought in battle.

Kommo-oType: Dragon-FightingKommo-o is the Evolution of Hakamo-o. There is a legend that says Kommo-o are covered in glittering scales in order to drive away a great darkness covering the world. This Pokémon can learn the new move Clanging Scales. When using this attack, Kommo-o scrapes the scales covering its body against one another, attacking with a loud clamor. After using this move, Kommo-o’s Defense is lowered.

SteeneeType: GrassThe Fruit Pokémon Steenee is the Evolution of Bounsweet. The calyx on this Pokémon’s head is very hard, and Steenee attacks by smacking its opponent with it, combined with kicks from its tough legs. This Pokémon’s fragrance is even more delectable than that of Bounsweet.

TsareenaType: GrassOnly the strongest of Steenee are able to evolve into Tsareena. A very noble Pokémon, Tsareena use their strength to protect and rule over Bounsweet as their queen. This Pokémon attacks with very powerful, majestic kicks and uses its powerful fragrance to mesmerize its opponents. Some Tsareena have the exclusive new ability Queenly Majesty, which prevents opponents from using priority moves.

RibombeeType: Bug-FairyRibombee is the Evolution of Cutiefly. This Pokémon collects flower nectar and pollen to make into balls, known as Pollen Puffs, which it can then launch at its opponent in battle. Some of the Pollen Puffs that Ribombee make also have relaxing effects or can relieve tiredness. These Pollen Puffs are distributed all over the Alola region.

Alolan GrimerType: Poison-DarkAs the population of the Alola region increased, dealing with garbage became a serious problem. As a solution, Grimer were imported from other regions and fed primarily on garbage, so their body composition changed—as did their form. What appear to be teeth in this Pokémon’s mouth are in fact residual toxins from the garbage it eats, which have hardened and crystallized. There are more than a hundred Alolan Grimer in Alola’s garbage-processing plants.

Alolan MukType: Poison-DarkAlolan Muk evolves from Alolan Grimer. The Muk in the Alola region produce and store their toxins within their bodies so, unlike Muk in other regions, you won’t detect any unpleasant aromas when you draw near one. Alolan Muk has the same poisonous crystals as Alolan Grimer, but they are all over the surface of its body. Alolan Muk uses them to attack, just like other Pokémon use their fangs or claws.