Apple’s iPhone 7 will be super limited in stores and all jet black and Plus models are sold out

Apple has issued a statement tonight that is essentially setting expectations for those who hoped they’d be able to walk into an Apple store on Friday and pick themselves up an iPhone. The statement makes it clear that all iPhones will be in short supply for walk-in customers without a reservation.

The statement also indicates that Apple’s jet black iPhones andall iPhone 7 plus models in all colorshave sold out completely in the initial online ordering period and thatnoinventory will be available.

Yep, that’s right, if you want an iPhone in jet black, just order it online and wait — you won’t find one in stores.

This matches what I’ve heard, which is that jet black iPhone 7s are incredibly hard to come by — even for employees and executives inside Apple — especially the Plus models. Most reviewers and other early birds got matte black iPhone 7 Pluses to test — I only know of one exception.

I personally love the jet black finish and, regardless of a tendency to scuff, am really attached to it on my review iPhone 7. I’ll be waiting to buy a jet black Plus.

Apple’s statement is below:

We couldn’t be happier with the initial response to iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus, and we are looking forward to beginning sales through our retail stores and partners around the world.Beginning Friday, limited quantities of iPhone 7 in silver, gold, rose gold, and black will be available for walk-in customers at Apple retail stores. During the online pre-order period, initial quantities of iPhone 7 Plus in all finishes and iPhone 7 in jet black sold out and will not be available for walk-in customers. Availability at partner locations for all finishes may vary and we recommend checking directly with them.

Customers can continue to order all models in all colors on apple.com. We sincerely appreciate our customers’ patience as we work hard to get the new iPhone into the hands of everyone who wants one as quickly as possible.