Disruptor Beam is developing a multiplayer strategy game based on The Walking Dead

Game developerDisruptor Beamhas already adaptedGame of ThronesandStar Trekto the world of smartphones and tablets. Now it’s addingThe Walking Deadto that list.

CEO Jon Radoff saidThe Walking Dead: March to Warwill be a multiplayer strategy game for iOS and Android, where players (potentially tens of thousands of them on a single map) compete with each other for resources and battle for survival.

It’s aWalking Deadgame, so naturally, there will be zombies, but Radoff said that for the most part, “they’re kind of an annoyance.”

“It’s like in the show, where yeah, zombies are occasionally a threat, but the real threat is the other players,” he said.

Radoff added that he sees his company as following in the footsteps of storytelling-focused games companies like LucasArts and Bioware: “With mobile and social network games, there was an opportunity to take that audience for Bioware games and start thinking in terms of billions of people.”

The first thing that Disruptor Beam does to reach that potential audience is focus on adapting popular franchises with big fanbases — people who don’t necessarily think of themselves as gamers but would be willing to try out a related game on their smartphone.

The franchise owners are increasingly willing to work with mobile gaming companies, Radoff said — not just to bring in additional revenue, also because these games help them stay connected with fans throughout the year and build a community. (Walter Driver, whose company Scopely also madea Walking Dead game, recentlytold me something similar.)

In this case, Disruptor Beam is working withWalking Deadcreator Robert Kirkman’s company Skybound Entertainment. Radoff suggested thatMarch to Warcould “tell the story of rebuilding civilization against a backdrop of feudalism — it’s reliving tribal warfare.”

More broadly, he said Disruptor Beam doesn’t just try to “reskin” an existing game mechanic for a random license.

“We actually go the reverse way,” he said. “We start with the story, which means you have to have these kind of experiences, these type of game systems to manifest it.”

The Walking Dead: March to Waris scheduled to launch next year.