How the microbiome will lead a revolution in the consumerization of personalized medicine and diet

The humanmicrobiome —meaning all of our microbes’ genes —willreshape theconsumerizationofpersonalizedmedicineanddiet. Following the human genome project, technological advancements have brought us much closer to acute precision in disease diagnosis and treatment.

The microbiome, considered by some scientists “as a newly discovered and largely unexplored organ,” has the potential to change the way we diagnose and treat the most critical diseases of our time: Crohn’s, diabetes, obesity, various cancers, acute diarrhea, mental disorders and more.

As if the human body isn’t complicated enough, each one of us possesses a unique microbial structure — in the context of drug discovery and nutrition, thiswillhave an impact on how consumers respond topersonalizedtherapeutics and diets. Whereaspersonalizedmedicineonce felt like a concept from a science fiction movie that was prohibitive because the technology was not yet there, the dream of amicrobiomeis to makepersonalizedmedicineand nutrition accessible to all.

How, then,willcompanies that play in the health, wellness and nutrition space respond to these technological advancements?

It is evident that wewillcontinue to see a rise of themicrobiomeapplications in human health and more investment dollars being spent on theconsumerizationofpersonalizedmedicine. The pharma industry has explored a number ofmicrobiometopics, but none are more mature than the probiotic and prebiotic segments. The weight control market is worth nearly$60 billion in the U.S. alone — and probiotics contribute more than half of it. Even though probiotics have been marketed for years, theFDA has been vocalabout the fact that it has not monitored dietary supplements, and cautions consumers against them.

Despite the large volume of publications, patents and clinical trials that surround probiotics and prebiotics, developing consumer food products that deliver concrete results is a challenge that pharmaceutical market research teams must solve.

For example,ViThera Pharmaceuticalsis taking probiotic strains (some clinically tested) and using them to create therapeutics for chronic diseases — but the strains available in food products such as yogurt are more difficult to market.Dannon’s Activia and DanActivelines of yogurt have historically been marketed as good for digestive health and a strong source of probiotics.

Much of themicrobiomefocus targets the human gut, where there is a higher density of microbes about which multinational companies are trying to learn more.

Earlier this year, two researchers from the Weizmann Institute of Science published the results of a study from thePersonalizedNutrition Projectthat looks at how individuals respond differently to food, based in part on the different microbiomes they host. The results found that there is no item of food whose effects are predictably universal for everyone, and that nutrition recommendations should bepersonalized.

How, then, do we determine which products are “healthy” if what is healthy for me is not as healthy for you? Many large companies that address a wide consumer base have already noted this — that the future of “mass” is custom — and have started to try to profile groups not based on traditional demographic segmentation, but rather through trying to understandmicrobiomeprofiling.

If widely accepted, this new Weizmann studywillhave a huge impact on the way we think about health and nutrition products, and the companies that make them. It proves to be the case that far more diseases than previously known may result from human interaction with themicrobiomeinside each one of us.

In the fight against cancer, early diagnosis is essential to effective treatment. Healthcare companies are pursuing new ways to use themicrobiometo streamline cancer diagnostics (as well as other diseases).

One company applying themicrobiometo cancer diagnostics isMetabiomics, an early-stage molecular diagnostics company. Metabiomics is focused on creating a non-invasive stool test that analyzes the human gutmicrobiomefor the earlier and more accurate identification of colon polyps and colorectal cancer. The key to Metabiomics’ innovation is its patented MultiTag™ DNA sequencing technology that can analyze themicrobiomein ways that were not previously possible.

Another field with growing momentum inpersonalizedmedicineis Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT), a procedure in which fecal matter is collected from a tested donor to treat certain gut disorders. Researchers are exploring FMT’s potential role for treating gastrointestinal diseases, such as IBS and Crohn’s Disease. Gettingmicrobiome-based therapies into the market is challenging, but companies such asRebiotix, a biotechnology company, is working to commercialize FMT research by creating bacteria and fecal microbiota products by delivering live, human microbes into a patient’s gut to treat diseases.

Developments inpersonalizedmedicineand the unique nature of the humanmicrobiomeoffers an opportunity for Big Pharma to develop devices that no adjacent industry has the expertise to develop.

Microbes serve to defend against disease and strengthen the immune system, so disease prevention is a natural fit formicrobiomeinnovation. Prevention represents a massive opportunity for healthcare companies — the probiotics marketwillbe worth over$50 billion by 2020.

However, probiotics for digestive health are not the only preventative application formicrobiomeinnovation.

Therapeutics and diagnostics are two key applications formicrobiomeresearch.

There may not be any commercial products available at this point, but there are still many healthcare companies innovating in this space.EnteromeandEvolve Biosystemsare two companies looking tomicrobiomesto treat and diagnosemicrobiome-related diseases and conditions.

Enterome, a Paris-based company emerging in the field of the human gut, is looking to treat inflammatory bowel diseases and metabolic diseases such as diabetes and obesity. Enterome’s most advanced product, EB 8018 (in the investigational new drug stage of development), takes advantage of the company’s metagenomics platform to target the intestinalmicrobiome, which plays an important role in the pathogenesis of Crohn’s Disease.

Evolve Biosystems is focused on pregnancy, as infants with higher rates of respiratory, GI disorders and hyper-allergenic responses have been correlated to the gut microbiome of their mothers. The company aims to create a proprietary probiotic-based biotherapeutics system for improved infant microbiome health in the first six months.

Aside from patents and clinical trials, pharmaceutical market researchers must recognize the importance of academic publications to see where themicrobiomemarket is heading in terms of use cases and competitor innovation.

Microbiomecontinues to be a reappearing trend that cross-cuts pharmaceutical, medical, wellness and nutrition, and this study from Weizmann indicates that we are just at the beginning stages of seeing how thiswillplay out across the goods and products we eat. Imagine that one day each one of uswillhave our own individualized,personalizedwellness anddietplans based on our own microbes. Each of us “optimized” by science, and knowing how wewillreact to new drug therapies and what benefit wewillreceive from what we ingest.

Microbiomeresearch could pave the road to a new era and approach toward prevention and disease management. Healthy individuals, or asymptomatic patients, are still reluctant to take action on prevention and, to some extent, disease interception, especially when symptoms are not yet mature. Companies like Johnson & Johnson and Dannon are leading the market in themicrobiomearea and wewillbegin to see more companies innovating in this space in the near future.Microbiomehas already impacted consumers’ daily behaviors and has been adopted through various commercialized products.

The challenge remains in moving from well-being to real prevention and disease interception. The reality is that themicrobiomehas the potential to impact us at any and all stages of our lives, whether it is to diagnose and maintain a healthy microbiota or to diagnose early on to prevent microbe-associated conditions (directly or indirectly) and consequently impact our expected lifespan. The big question is howmicrobiomeswillimpact our biological age and its evolution? Beyond living longer,willwe look younger, eat healthier and eliminate chronic diseases one day thanks to the human gutmicrobiome? Our answer is yes.