Discors snags $1.2M to decomplicate the news

Guns are good (and bad). The EU is great (and terrible). Mr. Trump is a genius (and the worst human to walk the planet). The news landscape is complicated and there isalwaysanother side to the story. EnterDiscors, which todaylaunched an iOS appand announced it has raised a healthy stack of Benjamins to help people get a deeper view on what’s going on in the world.

“Our mission is to make it easier for busy people to be informed by removing barriers to the world’s best journalism,” said Basil Enan, Discors co-founder and CEO, explaining that the company’s new app takes news stories produced in-house and pairs them with insights, commentary, analysis and opinion from top experts and publications.

The company covers the day’s top stories with an approach of “I’ll take just the facts, please.” Stories are selected by the in-house editorial team from sources including some of the world’s biggest news wires, such as Associated Press, Reuters and AFP.

The news startup further confirmed that it raised $1.2 million from angel investors, founders andMatter Venturesto grow additional publisher partnerships.

“We spent 6 months really nailing the news: How to efficiently and effectively provide our readers with the who, what, where, when,” says Enan. “But being informed means also understanding thewhyand theso what. That’s where Discors really shines.”

To dig that little bit deeper, the company has partnered with some of the best-respected commentators and analysts from The Economist, CNN, The Guardian, Bloomberg View, Foreign Policy, Tronc, The Washington Post and others.

“We think the best way to understand the news is to hear what a handful of really smart people have to say about it,” the founders explain, encouraging people to make up their own minds.

Because of the company’s partnerships, it means you don’t need to worry about paywalls either; if the article is available on Discors, it’s available in full, which is a nice bonus.

The app is free to download and to use for now, but the company confirms it will be rolling out subscription plans later this year.