Lego reveals its official ‘Rogue One: A Star Wars Story’ sets

Lego has pulled back the curtain on the officialRogue One: A Star Wars Storysets we all new had to be coming, and as usual, details of the sets reveal some very minor imaginary tech spoilers from the film, which is set to premiere December 16.

The sets include three large characters from the movie, as well as five vehicle kits that come with minifig versions of the heroes and villains. Said vehicles include some interesting retro takes on old favorite designs like the X-Wing, TIE Fighter and Imperial Shuttle, which makes sense given that this film takes place before the events of the original movie series.

All the sets go on sale September 30. Here’s a breakdown of each set, along with the description provided by Lego and their retail cost:

75121 – Imperial Death Trooper™

Elite soldiers of the Imperial Intelligence, Death Troopers are the Empire’s most imposing enforcers and bodyguards! Build the trooper, grab the blaster pistol from the holster or fire the blaster rifle with spring-loaded shooter. Then put him in a battle pose and get ready to defend the Empire!

US RRP: $24.99

75120 – K-2SO™

Once an Imperial security droid, K-2SO is now ready to fight for the Rebel Alliance. Build the droid, then push the button to the side to swing each arm or push it straight to swing both at the same time! The powerful K-2SO has the strength and skill to take on the Empire!

US RRP: $24.99

75119 – Sergeant Jyn Erso™

This tough Rebel soldier has everything she needs to take on the Empire. Build the figure, load the blaster rifle, put her in a battle pose and fire the spring-loaded shooter! Then grab the truncheons and turn the wheel to activate the arm-swinging battle function. Jyn Erso is ready to bring the battle to the Empire!

US RRP: $24.99

75156 – Krennic’s Imperial Shuttle

When a tough transport ship is needed, Krennic’s Imperial Shuttle is the perfect choice. Put him into the pilot seat, open out the thick-armor plating and seat the Death Troopers. Lower the ramp and check the blasters are secured, then arm the spring-loaded shooters and seal the hull for takeoff. Raise the landing skids, lower the wings for flight mode and set off on another dangerous mission!

US RRP: $89.99

75155 – Rebel U-Wing Fighter™

Open the cockpit and place the U-Wing Pilot in his seat. Fire up the engines and launch into the sky. Keep a lookout below with the transparent window, and when you spot the enemy, fire the front spring-loaded shooters and stud shooters mounted in the side doors. You can even fold the wings back for a bigger model!

US RRP: $79.99

75154 – TIE Striker™

Prepare for launch with the amazing TIE Striker, the Empire’s atmospheric patrol fighter! Open the minifigure cockpit from the top or front and put in the TIE Pilot. Help the Imperial ground crew member put supplies in the rear hold and arm the spring-loaded shooters. Then adjust the huge wings and launch into the skies in search of rebels!

US RRP: $69.99

75153 – AT-ST™ WalkerGo on the hunt for Baze and the Rebel Trooper aboard the All Terrain Scout Transport. Open the top hatch, load up the AT-ST Driver and move the legs to speed into action. When you’ve tracked them down, turn the wheel to rotate the top and prepare to fire the spring-loaded shooters! Can Baze and the trooper escape the advancing AT-ST? That’s for you to decide…

US RRP: $39.99

75152 – Imperial Assault Hovertank™

Help Chirrut battle the Imperial Assault Hovertank as it patrols the streets. This tough urban patrol vehicle has a two-minifigure cockpit and a rotating and elevating turret gun with spring-loaded shooters to target enemies of the Empire. And if the rebel forces hide out of sight, open the storage container, grab the blasters and play out your own mini urban battles!

US RRP: $29.99