Five really good reasons to attend TC Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

It’s a big decision to take a day or two to attend a startup tech conference. No doubt you would like a solid return on your investment of time and money, not a tumble in the mosh pit of a mega tech event. Sound right? Then consider TechCrunch’s Disrupt London for these reasons:

Zero in on therightstartups for you.Investors and founders benefit fromCrunchMatch, the TechCrunch program to arrange investor appointments with founders on-site in private meeting areas and, if desired, suggested matches based on company and investor profiles.

Enjoy theexcellentcompany. TechCrunch works hard to make our attendee and speaker mix genuinely diverse and interesting. Hackers, university students, tech-inclined youth from disadvantaged backgrounds, founders, investors, corporate folk and more enjoy our show together, andwe are all better for it.

Hearamazingspeakers, crisply interviewed.TechCrunch’s editors spendmonthsdesigning the Disrupt program, which is why the agenda features so many successful yet rarely  seeninvestors and entrepreneurs, such as Dr. Michael Lynch, Citymapper’s Azmat Yusuf, GoEuro’s Naren Shaam, ELBI’s Natalia Vodianova, Accompany’s Amy Chang, and many more. And of course, you don’t usually get journalists sitting there grilling guests for all to see — unless it’s at a Disrupt.

Discover startups,reallygood ones.The TechCrunch team travels the world to recruit great startups for Disrupt. More than300companieswill exhibit on the Startup Alley floor, and another 12 will compete in ourStartup Battlefield. Meet them on the floor, make connections, and maybe even new friends. There are no ‘tyre-kickers‘ at Disrupt!

SharpenyourBrexit game.The Disruptagenda featuresnot one but two Brexit panels,Stopping the Brexit Brain DrainandBrexit Face Off – Two Sides to Britain’s Tech Future,both aimed at helping founders and investors make sense of post-Brexit scenarios and options. Will it have an effect on you? Find out.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece.You can get your tickets at this priceuntil 5 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.

We hope to see you at Disrupt London!