Underrepresented founders: apply now for Include Office Hours with Venrock

TechCrunch IncludeOffice Hoursare happening in NYC on November 3rd! Richard Kerby and David Pakman ofVenrockwill join TechCrunch to provide valuable advice and feedback to startups.

Launched in 2014, Include is TechCrunch’s diversity program, aimed at facilitating opportunities for underrepresented groups in tech to take their startups to the next level.

The Office Hours program is part of that effort. Once monthly, TechCrunch works with VC partners to provide feedback and advice to early-stage companies. To be considered for a meeting in session with Venrock in New York City,fill out the application here.

Underrepresented groups in tech include, but are not limited to, Black, Latino, Native American, LGBT and female founders. Preference will be given to teams that can meet in person. Startups should at least have a functional prototype.

Let’s learn more about our co-hosts.

Richard Kerby, Vice President

Richard Kerby joined Venrock in 2012. He focuses primarily on identifying and evaluating early-stage investments. Prior to joining Venrock, Richard was an Associate at Institutional Venture Partners (IVP), where he focused primarily on identifying and evaluating later-stage investments. While at IVP, Richard worked with IVP portfolio companies such as Dropbox, Klout, Twitter, Shazam, Sugar, and Yext.

Prior to joining IVP, Richard worked in the Investment Banking Division of Credit Suisse First Boston.

David Pakman

After 12 years as an internet entrepreneur, David joined Venrock in 2008 as a Partner and focuses on early stage internet and digital media companies. Previously, David was the CEO of eMusic, the world’s leading digital retailer of independent music, second only to iTunes in number of downloads sold. Prior to joining eMusic, David co-founded Myplay in 1999 in Redwood City, CA, which introduced the “digital music locker” and pioneered the locker category. In 2001, Myplay was sold to Bertelsmann’s ecommerce Group. Before Myplay, he was Vice President at N2K Entertainment, which created the first digital music download service. He also was the co-creator of Apple Computer’s Music Group.