The worth of your professional profile, network and personal data

Tim Berners-Leecreated the web in 1989. Twenty-seven years later,he’s asking for areinvention. The web has made life easier, but it has also introduced challenges and ethical questions pertaining topersonaldata, access to information and privacy. Berners-Lee laments that the web has morphed into a surveillancenetworkfilled with corporate hackers and government spooks with the tools to trollyourevery keystroke and mineyourpersonaldata.

Cue Microsoft’sacquisitionof LinkedIn, a merger that unites two corporate internet behemoths that own or have a direct line to massive amounts of ourpersonalandprofessionalinformation. The leading cloud company and the leadingprofessionalnetworknow have access to the majority of our online lives,potentially creating the first single source fordataon individual professionals. To many, this feels like the exactopposite of Berners-Lee’s plea for decentralization.

How much further can we go down this road before crossing the line between convenience and forfeiting privacy completely?

Some are saying theMicrosoft acquisitionis purely about thedata— $26.2 billionworthofdatato be exact ($60for each of the 433 million members). The two companies have framed the acquisition as a win for their users, heralding it as an integration between productivity suite and business networking platform to form the paragon of productivity.

The question is: Who is controlling how our sensitivepersonalinformation is being used and shared? Who should own this responsibility?

Ideally, the answer would be the consumers who use these platforms, along with the companies that own and have access to theirdata. However, the recentepidemic of privacy breacheshas made it difficult to trust thesedatagiants.

Consumers should be wary of the distinction between free sites like Google and Facebook versus product and service providers such as Apple. Apple creates revenue through selling hardware and services, so there’s no immediate need to monetize consumerdata. The Facebooks and LinkedIns of the world are more prone to exploitpersonaldatato create revenue because they don’t provide product, or at least not on the same scale as Apple. In short, the dissolution of the need to create revenue by using consumerdatamakes Apple the more trustworthy business model.

Many consumers are hesitant to give up the convenience of on-demand information. “Just Google it,” right? When you buy or search for something online, you are expressing intent that can and most likely will be used to make recommendations or provide relevant search results. This is a great support tool for consumers and information seekers.

However, this does not require tracking of the user wherever they go on the internet and stockpiling ofpersonalinformation ad infinitum.

There are several alternatives to these Google-styledata-gobblers. Search engines likeQwant.comare privacy concerned non-tracking search engines that provide comparable results. Non-tracking search engines do not recordyourevery click, swipe and purchase, keepingyourdatasafe from blind exploitation.

The convenience of Cortana anticipating the information you need foryournext meeting comes at a cost. Where is the line between the bliss of extreme convenience and the sacrifice of privacy?

The current social climate expects, even demands, constant social sharing and the need for an ever-increasing speed and agility in information handling. The gluttony of sharedpersonalinformation places a responsibility on the sharer that is two-fold:

Check privacy policies to see how muchdataa company is allowed to store. Ideally it would be a feature of the service to not store everything they get from you.

Don’t store what you don’t need.Datathat isn’t there cannot be lost, stolen or taken advantage of.

If we fail to set limits on how much we share and remain ignorant of privacy policies, the web becomes adatafree-for-all — a constantly growing pot ofpersonal, private information that serves the needs of entities we have no intention of serving.

The web created endless potential for learning and connecting with others. Unfortunately, it also created a virtual cloak for those who hope to collect and use it for their own gain.

Although the web is distributed, huge amounts ofdataare amassed by very few companies, re-centralizing it to very few companies owned by very few people. Berners-Lee, a passionate supporter of decentralization, touts peer-to-peer services that storedatawith the person who owns the information, not with a singular company. Products likeownCloud,mailbox.organdProtonetallow users to build decentralized services ensuring full ownership and privacy.

Unlessdataownership is returned to the user, people will continue to be the product.

The Microsofts of this generation wantyourdata— and they can pay for it.

Be warned.