Announcing the Startup Battlefield of Disrupt London 2016

TechCrunch is pleased to announce the startups selected to participate in the Disrupt London 2016 Startup Battlefield. Over the next two days, these companies will compete on tech’s biggest stage for $50,000 and the coveted Disrupt Cup.

The Battlefield represents the crème de la crème; the startups onstage represent just over 2 percent of those that applied. Startup Battlefield serves to showcase the most promising early-stage and, dare we say, disruptive startups in the industry. And this batch does not disappoint.

These companies will be streamlining food supply chains, facilitating faster research and drug development, helping nurses monitor their patients, enabling crowd produced videos, personalizing every website and making travel cheaper and education better. And of course, they’re bringing AI to everything.

Battlefield startups hail from right here in London and around the world. Teams have traveled from Norway, Germany, Nigeria and the U.S. to participate.

Over the past month, these startups have been working tirelessly to prepare to launch, rushing to finalize designs, and produce that final prototype. They spent time with TechCrunch staff to hone their pitches to a crisp six minutes. All this work pays off when each startup faces off against an impressive lineup of judges during their live Q&A session.

Only a few selected finalists will have a chance to present once more on Tuesday, with a new set of expert judges grilling them with an extended Q&A session.

The pitches will begin, and be streamed live, starting at 12 p.m. GMT today.

Battlefield companies will also be showcasing in the Startup Alley throughout the conference. Stop by and see what all the fuss is about!

Monday (In order of appearance)12pm GMT, Session One:Century,InsideDNA,AirWander,Foodstantly,PhenixP2P2:10pm GMT, Session Two:Seenit,LiftIgniter,Iris AI,Seeds5:05pm GMT, Session Three:Aiden,Oxehealth,Open as App, Wild Card*

Tuesday11:30am GMT, Startup Battlefield Finals

*Wild Card companies are selected by audience vote and TechCrunch editorial staff from the Startup Alley. Download the Disrupt App to cast your vote.