First round of Disrupt SF Hackathon tickets now available

The wait is over, hackathon fans. With Disrupt SF 2016 right around the corner, we thought it was high time we released the first wave of tickets to the Disrupt SF Hackathon.

The hackathon takes place September 10-11 at Pier 48 in San Francisco. Those of you looking to spend the weekend before Disrupt hard at work coding, tinkering and hacking together something pretty awesome can get your free hackathon ticketshere.

The hackathon kicks off at 12:30 p.m. PT on Saturday, September 10, with networking and the forming of the hackathon teams. On Sunday, after a grueling 20-plus hours of hacking and coding, teams will have just 60 seconds to present their projects to a panel of judges on the Disrupt stage.

In addition to the satisfaction that comes with building something cool, those teams have the opportunity to score a few tickets to Disrupt, a $5,000 grand prize and several gadgets, toys and other monetary prizes from our sponsors.

All teams who earn a score of three or higher will win two free tickets to themain Disrupt conferenceon September 12-14. There, they’ll get to check out the hundreds of startups on Display in Startup Ally and Hardware Alley, take in the Startup Battlefield competition, hear from some incredible entrepreneurs and investors in a series of interviews and fireside chats, and connect with other conference attendees at the various parties and after-parties.

The hackathon is a great place for both hardware and software companies —software company AlexaSitewon the event at Disrupt NY 2016, and hardware companyShower With Friendswon the event at Disrupt SF in 2014.

And it isn’t just small projects that do well at the hackathon. You could very well build the next big thing in just 24 hours. GroupMe, for example, was launched out of the first Disrupt NY Hackathon, andwent on to get acquired by Skype for $80 million.

All you have to do is bring whatever great ideas you may have in the ol’ noggin, and spend a hard, fun-filled weekend bringing your ideas that much closer to reality. We can’t wait to see what you all come up with.

But first you’ll need to grab a ticket, and just in case you missed the link above, you cangrab your completely free ticket to the hackathon here.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.