We’re looking at cyberbullying the wrong way

It has beendeclaredthat Twitter has an abuse problem. Whether it was theMilo and Leslie Jones fiasco, thescathing BuzzFeedarticle or the unveiling of the platform’s ownQuality Filter, many are blue in the face from yelling at the platform.

However, blaming Twitter is a narrow-minded argument and a misunderstanding of the true problem at hand. By no means is Twitter faultless, as there is certainly room to grow by solidifying a stance between free speech and censorship. This is a difficult process that platforms such asFacebookandYouTubehave gone through before, and still are experiencing. No network is immune, and no one has discovered the perfect balance, even if it existed.

Twitter did not give birth tocyberbullying,nor will they abolish it. Online abuse is omnipresent and not exclusive to one platform over another. It’s a behavior that starts with a mentality, not a platform. Attacking Twitter for its policing or lack thereof does not attack the root of the problem. Even if Twitter ceased to exist tomorrow, online harassment will not expire.

A bully is a bully and a troll is a troll, no matter where you go online. For as long as online mass communication has existed, from the early days of AOL chat rooms, onlinebullyinghas existed. So, in order to effectively address the issue ofcyberbullying, one must not only question the environments that yield such behaviors, but examine how and why the behavior exists in the first place.

The ability to hide behind not only a screen, and often an unidentifiable name or avatar, unquestionably leaves online harassment to prevail. Whether one’s absolutely anonymous or not, the reduction of faceless communication disallows immediate, raw or physical reactions and consequences.

Infamously stated, “On the internet, nobody knows you’rea dog.” While thecomicwas originally printed inThe New Yorkerin July 1993, the claim never rang more true than it does today. You are faceless online. While publications recently touteda studythat found “trolls are even more hostile when they’reusing their real names,” the support in favor of the counter argument “anonymity promotes onlinebullying” is far more prevalent, substantial and logical.

With this in mind, one possible counteraction to Twitter’s predicament would be to restore the faces from faceless communication. When verification and accountability exists, it can be presumed that harmful behaviors such as abuse and trolling will curb. However, is this a step in the right direction?

Twitter’s problem is very real indeed, but the implications and possible solutions for this platform are apart of a much larger discussion pertaining to all human-connected developments. Going forward,weneed to ask which directionswe’d first like to head in. As Jonathan Zittrain, the co-founder of Harvard’s Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society, states in Werner Herzog’s filmLo and Behold, “Wecan design systems that are really anonymous or that are utterly identifiable down to the person, and it’s time for us to think about what contextswe’d want to support what.”

In a context like Twitter’s, dowefavor identifiable and culpable communication or anonymous and immune expression… even if that enables trolling andbullying?

While promoting his latest film,Lo and Behold, Werner Herzogclaimed, “The internet is not good or evil, or dark or light-hearted, it’s humans.” This resonates quite well with Twitter. Whatweend up imagining, producing and enabling online ultimately materializes the reflection of the human collection.

So at the end of the day whenwepoint at a platform like Twitter, which many believe should be held responsible forcyberbullying,we’reaccusing inherently innocent defendants. In reality,weshould be pointing at ourselves.