The top 10 TechCrunch news videos of 2016

From robots and explosions to self-tying shoes, here’s a rundown of the most-buzzed-about TechCrunch news videos of 2016:

1. Apple Airpodshttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnurLwPvdWkAn obvious, but not necessarily expected,product announcementfrom Apple this fall, Airpods have a lot going for them. Several TC staffers havespent some quality-time testingthem out and have good things to say. In fact, Editor-in-Chief,Matthew Panzarino, listed Apple’s Airpods as one of hisfavorite things of 2016. After a three-month waiting period, Airpods finallywent on sale on December 12thso you can decide for yourself.

2. Tesla Model 3

At a somewhat more affordable starting price of $35,000, you could now opt for a sporty all-electric ride versus an Audi or BMW. It also packsa ton of cool featureslike 0-60 in under 6 seconds, autopilot hardware built in to the base model, front and rear trunks, and of course that stunning sun/moon/see-everything roof made of a single pane of glass.

3. Nike Hyperadapt

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_iJjchS9ZzsShoesthat tie themselves, need I say more? Nike’s Mags with Hyperadapt 1.0hit retail this month.And theBack to the Future replicasjust take the already awesome achievement to the next level.

4. SpaceX landing and exploding

Earlier this year, SpaceX went on a Falcon 9 launching spree trying to land a rocket with varying degrees of success. After four previous attempts, SpaceX successfully landed on a drone ship in April, which was very exciting. Then a few month month later, we were back toblowing things up. According to a recent article, SpaceX is lookingto try, try again. You can find abrief history of SpaceX here.

5. NES Classic Edition

[tc_unified_video code=”41fabb9d-3775-3a93-a5c1-2de374bec5de”] The demand for NES Classic exceeded Nintendo’s expectations making itnearly impossible to getyour hands on a system here in the States. The shrunken-down version of the original hardwarecomes preloaded with 30 classic gamesand retails for $60. What’s not to love?

6. Viv AI Assistant

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHbAyHfWSeIViv is a next-gen AI system built by the makers of Siri.Demoed live for the first timeon stage at TechCrunch’s Disrupt NY conference, Viv can do much more than just answer quick questions. Its AI is capable of writing its own code to accomplish tasks its never done before. A natural competitor to Siri and Google’s Assistant, Viv wasacquired by Samsung in October.

7. Microsoft Surface Studio

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETv_4rNYOBo At their Windows event this October, Microsoftunveiled the Surface Studio, an all-in-one PC with a 28-inch PixelSense display. It’s the thinnest display ever built, according to Microsoft,and it swivels.

8. Spot Mini

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3cfDsVTU72w Alsodemoed on the Disrupt stage, Spot Mini is smaller, lighter, less menacingversion of the original Spot. It looks like a dog and can climb stairs, open doors and more.

9. GoPro Karma

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0p02bFF3V94 There was a lot of hype aroundthis quadcopter. Too badGoPro recalled itafter only 16 days on the market.

10. Tesla Solar Roof

Elon Musk announced a new Teslasolar roof productthat will give your normal-looking roof solar energy gathering powers. Rather than stashing big panels up there, Tesla will offer high-efficiency glass tiles that closely resemble regular roofing material. Not much detail on how well it works just yet, butit does indeed look great.

Looking for more popular videos to watch? You can find a rundown of our top 10 hardware startup videoshere.