We are on the verge of a consumer M&A avalanche

If you believe in the mantra “innovate or die,” you might conclude that the largestconsumerand retail brands are terminally ill. Giants like Kraft and Clorox all seem to be too slow and enslaved to shareholders to innovate. At the same time, they may be too large to perish…  at least for now.

Whatwehave here is the perfect storm foraconsumermergers and acquisitions (M&A)avalanche.

Bigconsumerpackaged goods (CPG) companies are struggling to sell their products toanew generation of shoppers.Aquick look at sales across various product sectors showsasteady downward slide for big brands. In the past five years, large brands lost market share to small brands in 42 of the top 54 most relevant food categories, according toJefferies. Erosion is happening in nearly everyconsumercategory.

Asconsumersincreasingly crave unique, authentic brands that meet personal preferences, marketing and distribution costs are falling dramatically.Consumersare researching and seeking out products rather than responding to advertising.

Major CPG companies are losing billions in market share. And they aren’t doing much about it. When was the last timealargeconsumerbrand introduced an innovative product that anybody noticed? Research and development (R&D) should be more important — but is less emphasized — than ever.

At CircleUp,werecently pulled some data illustrating just how bad the R&D problem has become.Wefound that,onaverage, the biggestconsumerpackaged goods companies spend less than 2 percent of revenueonR&D, and close to 15 percentonmarketing and advertising. In technology, where innovation is front and center, the spending is nearly reversed: about 13 percentonR&D and 2 percentonmarketing and advertising.

Big brands aren’t oblivious to the challenges they’re facing. So why aren’t they investing more in new product development?

Big brands haven’t needed to innovate

For decades, large brands have been protected by the high cost of entry into the CPG market. The pre-social media, pre-Amazon era made it extremely expensive for small companies to get distribution and advertise their products. Demand for innovation was extremely low becauseconsumerswere so accustomed to seeing the same productsonthe shelf.

Innovation is risky

The path to innovation — developing and testing new products and weighing market responses — is flat-out risky. It could lead to quarterly and yearly losses and the future revenue takes years to kick in (if it does at all). Brand managers responsible for R&D decisions often have short-term incentives to not take risks. Shouldwemeet our quarterly numbers or shouldweinnovateonanew product that likely won’t show top-line impact until years after I’m transferred to run another division?

Big brands don’t have the personnel to change

There have been so few incentives to change for so many years that most big brands don’t have robust R&D teams or experience. These behemoths just aren’t well-equipped to test the water and make great new products.

These companies are decades old, sometimesacentury, and they aren’t used to change. The image of your grandfatheronthe dance floor comes to mind. As does Clay Christensen’s “The Innovator’s Dilemma,” whichcalls out this trend. Big brands spend so much effort selling their existing products that they fail to plan for the future, then struggle shifting to solve foraproblem they weren’t born into.

Mergers and acquisitions are, effectively, bigconsumerbrands’ substitute for R&D. And with drastically shrinking market share, slow growth and big cash war chestsontheir balance sheets,we’ll be sure to seealot more of it. Andalot more early-stage investing, as well, so they can participate in more of the growth, earlier inabrand’s life.

Unilever spentamere 1.9 percentonits R&D last year, but it hasn’t been shy about hedging bets elsewhere, snatching upDollar Shave Club ($1 billion)andSeventh Generation ($700 million). Unable to outflank startup brands, bigconsumerbrands areupping theirM&Agamesasaway to outsource R&D and leave the risk of innovation to the startups that do it best.

This trend has already taken hold in the pharmaceutical industry. The conglomerates there skip R&D almost entirely, acquire new formulas like crazy, then plug those products into their vast distribution pipes while they focusonadvertising and regulatory issues. Bigconsumerbrands areonthe same path.

But the deciding factor, and whatwe’ve yet to see, is how well these big brands preserve the quality and authenticity of their newly acquired products. People increasingly demand personalized offerings, be it organic, environmentally sustainable, fair-trade, of an ethnic variety — the list goeson. Now, the seemingly simple act of selectingahousehold cleaning solution is an act of self-expression. If big brands don’t preserve the uniqueness, they’ll be back where they started.

The forces behind anM&Aavalanchehave been building for several years. Last year alone theM&Ainconsumerand retail was $238 billion, almost twice the size ofM&Ain tech. TheM&Aavalanchesignals are there, and they’re only growing stronger. Get ready for the ride.