Sling TV’s streaming service for cord cutters hits Windows 10

Dish Network’s streaming service for cord cutters,Sling TV, has made its way to Windows 10. The companyannouncedtoday the launch of its on-demand TV service for Windows 10 PCs and tablets, through a new application live now in the Windows App Store. While Sling TV’s legacy PC software will continue to be supported, the new Windows 10 application has been designed to take advantage of features unique to that operating system.

This includes support for touch, a vertical main menu on Sling TV, and Windows’ Live Tiles, which will now show “Favorites” and “Continue Watching” ribbons when Sling TV is pinned to the Start Menu.

The new, responsive app can also adapt to different screen sizes and can be snapped to use only half the screen. And it works with Cortana, Windows 10’s built-in assistant. That means you can search for specific shows or channels by voice.

As with any Sling TV subscription, new customers can sign up for over-the-top streaming TV starting at $20 per month. This includes access to a number of top TV channels, like ESPN, Disney, AMC, Comedy Central, HGTV, TNT, TBS, FOX and NBC (in select markets), A&E, VICELAND and CNN.

Subscribers can then choose to customize their channel lineup further by selecting various add-on packs for $5/month. This lets you access additional channels, grouped by genres like “kids,” “sports,” “comedy,” and more. Premium channels like HBO, Cinemax, and now, Starz, are also available.

In fact,Starz and Starz Encore were just added today, and the pack is being offered for free until September 14th as a promotion. It’s then $9 per month to include it in your Sling TV subscription, either Sling TV Blue or Sling TV Orange. (The colors refer to different tiers – Blue lets you stream on multiple devices at the same time, and has an expanded channel lineup.) The new Starz pack brings nearly 3,000 new titles to the service, Sling TV notes.

In addition,Sling TV rolled out college sports feeds from Pac-12 Networksto both Sling Blue and Orange’s “Sports Extra” packs today.

The company says that support for additional Windows 10 devices will arrive in the months ahead. In the meantime, the app isa free download from the Windows 10 app store.

Correction: Because my brain went on vacation temporarily, this post had to be corrected to attribute Sling TV to its correct owner Dish Network; not DirecTV.