Twitter scores with NFL deal

With the start of the new NFL season upon us,fansacross the U.S. — and indeed across the whole world — are turning their attention to who the winners and losers will be this year, and who’ll be making their way to Super Bowl LI onFebruary 5, 2017at NRG Stadium in Houston, Texas.

With plenty of interactive and innovative ways forfansto get involved, such asFantasy Football, perhaps the most exciting news forsportsfansis the NFL’sdealwithTwitterto live stream 10 games for free worldwide. This landmarkdeal, announced back in May, sees social networks finally able to take on traditionalbroadcasters, moving beyond being just a platform and into the business of content proper.

It is clear that both the NFL andTwitterare seeking to tap into the explosion in popularity of streaming video,which now accounts for more than two-thirds of all internet traffic, and is expected to jump to a staggering 82 percent by 2020. For the NFL, this builds on a previous test case with Yahoo, streaming one game last season, which successfully yielded15.2 million viewers and 33.6 million video streams.

What is also clear is thatsportsfanslove to watch events live, as95 percent of totalsportsprogram viewinghappens in real time, meaningTwitteris sitting on top of a massive opportunity here. The instant nature ofTwitterconversation has always appealed tosportsfans, with50 percent of allTwitter’s TV conversations focused onsports. That many of us use social networks while watching live programming is behavior that bothTwitterandbroadcastersare aware of — but until now, neither have really made the most of this opportunity.

TwitterCEO Jack Dorsey has said much about how he sees live experiences as being at the heart of the future ofTwitter. The aim is to keep people on the social network for longer, increasing the opportunity for users to be targeted by advertising. In this sense, thedealwith the NFL represents awatershedmoment not only forsportsfanswho now have a new, potentially much more interactive, way to watch their favorite teams, but also arguablyTwitter’s best opportunity to date to prove that it can be a valuable platform for advertisers.

So, the questions now revolve around how the content and accompanying advertising is going to be presented to users. Since the announcement of thedeal, we’ve had some clues from othersports. In early July,Twitterunexpectedly began streaming live footage from the Wimbledon tennis tournamentin a collaboration betweenTwitter, ESPN and the All England Club.

However, it did also say that this experiment was “an extremely early and incomplete test experience, and we’ll be making lots of improvements before we launch it in its final form.” There was a lot of criticism of the Wimbledon experience, the small viewing area versus the size of the tweet stream being one.

Twitterrecently announced it had outsourced the back-end delivery of itssportsstreams to BAMTech, which powers over 25,000 live events, making obvious to all that it will instead dedicate many more resources to try to make the live video experience as good as it can be for footballfans.

While there is much to improve on, it’s clear that social networks are aware of the behavior and needs offans— whether thesportshave a global reach like tennis and the NFL, or whether they have a much more niche audience. Similarly,broadcastersrecognize the importance of streaming — rather than broadcasting — so-called “minority”sports.

At the end of June, Walt Disney Co. — owners of ESPN and ABC —agreed to acquirea one-third stake in the video-streaming unit of MLB Advanced Media, the digital arm of Major League Baseball. Thisdealshows just how important it is for ESPN to be able to offer digital packages, rather than just traditional cable TV packages, in its fight to regain lost advertising revenue.

With the biggestsportsmedia company in the world moving to ensure thattechgiantslikeTwitterdon’t steal a march on them, the stage is set for some intriguing battles for live TV rights between establishedbroadcastersand innovative technology companies. The line between broadcaster and technology platform will continue to blur — NFL games broadcast live onTwitteris just the beginning.

Hopefully the biggest result of this will be that consumers have a greater choice of more innovative, interactive ways to watch their favoritesports, while bringingsportslike baseball — which don’t have a large following outside of the U.S. — to entirely new audiences. The potential for advertisers to then take advantage of an increasingly engaged and global set offanswill follow.