Female founders, apply now for Include Office Hours with Greylock

It’s happening! On Friday, September 9th from 4-6 p.m, Greylock Partners will join TechCrunch in hosting Include Office Hours.Apply now.

Unlike previous sessions, the upcoming office hours are solely focused on teams with at least one female founder. To sweeten the deal, teams that are selected for office hours will also be invited to an exclusive Women in Tech(Crunch) event, also taking place the evening of September 9th.

Launched in 2014,Includeis TechCrunch’s diversity program, aimed at facilitating opportunities for underrepresented groups in tech to take their startups to the next level.

Office hours are part of that effort. Once monthly, TechCrunch collaborates with VC partners to provide feedback and advice to early-stage companies. To be considered for the session on September 9 with Greylock,fill out the application here.

And now, for a little on our hosts.

Greylock Partners is focused on both consumer internet and enterprise IT. Their portfolio includes Airbnb, AppDynamics, Cloudera, Docker, Dropbox, Facebook (Nasdaq: FB), LinkedIn (NYSE: LNKD), Medium, Nextdoor, Palo Alto Networks (NYSE: PANW) and Workday (NYSE: WDAY).

Sarah joined Greylock as an investment partner in 2015. Her areas of focus include products, platforms, networks and marketplaces that enable new forms of communication, media and commerce.

Prior to Greylock, Sarah was the product lead for search, recommendations, machine vision and pin quality at Pinterest. Sarah then moved into product, becoming Pinterest’s founding PM for search and discovery, and launching Pinterest’s first search and recommendations features. She also led three acquisitions as she helped the company scale through a period of hyper-growth.

Sarah joined Pinterest in 2012 after co-leading the Series A investment while at Bessemer Venture Partners. She spent six years at Bessemer, investing in a wide range of businesses, from e-commerce companies such as Quidsi [parent company of Diapers.com, Soap.com, Wag.com and others] (acquired by Amazon), Onestop Internet and KupiVIP; to SaaS companies Mindbody Software (IPO), Cornerstone OnDemand (IPO) and Convertro (acquired by AOL); to an enterprise software company, Metalogix (acquired by Permira).

Jerry joined Greylock in 2013 as an investor and currently sits on the Board of Docker, Awake Networks, Attic Labs, Gladly and Rhumbix, and is a board observer on Cloudera. Prior to joining Greylock, Jerry was Vice President of Cloud and Application Services at VMware where he was part of the executive team that scaled the company from 400 to over 15,000 employees and $5 billion in revenue. In particular, Jerry enjoys the challenge of creating and defining new product categories and thinking through the challenges of Go-To-Market (www.UnitOfValue.com).

As part of the team that created Cloud Foundry, Jerry ran the product management and marketing teams responsible for all of VMware’s application infrastructure products, including vFabric, Spring, GemFire and its big data projects. Prior to the Cloud Application Platform, Jerry created and coined the term “VDI” for virtual desktop infrastructure as part of the creation of VMware’s enterprise desktop and application virtualization businesses.

Sarah joined Greylock in 2013. Prior to Greylock, Sarah was at Goldman Sachs, where she invested in Dropbox and helped take Workday public. She advised pre-IPO private technology companies (as well as public clients including Zynga, Netflix and NVIDIA) on strategic and financial issues.

Previously, Sarah worked with Casa Systems, a venture-funded startup that enables cable operators to meet growing demand for broadband services.

Daniel joined Greylock Partners as an investor in 2016. Prior to Greylock, Daniel worked as Senior Product Manager at LinkedIn, where he launched the LinkedIn Job Search app on both iOS and Android platforms. Under Daniel’s leadership, the team grew monthly engagement over 30x to millions of active users and the App reached No. 1 on U.S. App Store Top Charts in the Business Category.

Previously, Daniel was at Bright.com (which was acquired by LinkedIn in 2014) where he managed the Job Seeker product. He and his team launched the Bright Score multi-apply feature, which increased monthly search engagement by 10 percent. He was also a Product Manager at Inflection, where he worked on Archives.com, which was later acquired byAncestry.comin 2012.

If you’re interested in attending, applyhere.