Announcing the 10th annual Crunchies Awards nominations

It’s happening! The10th annual Crunchies Awardsshow is coming and will be held at the San Francisco War Memorial Opera House on February 6th, 2017. This is the tenth show and we’re determined to make it the best one yet, with a renewed focus on the startup community that we cover day in and day out.

We did a few things differently last year and they were a huge success. We’re again reaching out to find Crunchies winners by opening up nominations to you, the public. Those nominations will then be refined by TechCrunch editors.

When it comes to final voting, however, we made a big change last year that will continue this year. Our wide-ranging Crunchies Board will pick the winners by secret ballot. The Crunchies Board will once again include TechCrunch editors, alongside entrepreneurs, investors and other tech notables, including speakers and judges who have appeared on the Disrupt stage. An independent third-party will administer and tally the ballots, as well as keep the results secret until we announce the awards onstage.

This worked out well last year, bringing an excitement and energy to the stage, as well as some great surprises.

Starting today, we are accepting nominations for the 11 award categories listed below. Pleasehead over to the show pageand startnominating your favoritecandidates in the categories provided. Nominations will close on Thursday, November 3, 2016. We’ll see you at the Crunchies!

Hot New Startup

The young standout startup of the year

Best Technology

An exceptional recent technological achievement

Best App

A recent standout that has earned a place on your home screen

Best Startup Video

Best launch or explanatory video by a startup

Hardware of the Year

Breakout hardware product of the year

TechCrunch Include Award

An organization or individual that has advanced inclusion in tech

Social Impact

A company that has excelled in using technology to advance social impact

Founder of the Year

A founder that has made a statement in leadership or execution this year

Angel Investor of the Year

A breakout portfolio

VC of the Year

An investor whose bets on founders and companies have borne fruit this year

Best Overall Startup

A star startup in all categories

We’ll be releasing tickets for the 10th annual Crunchies in November. If you want to be notified, sign up for our newsletterhere. We hope to see you there.

Our sponsors help make the Crunchies happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.