Investors: Disrupt London’s huge crop of startups awaits you

We have a rich crop of startups at this year’sDisrupt London, and we’re making it easier than ever to check them out before the show and to arrange meetings in advance.  We’re all about making the best use of your time.

To get started, have a look at ourStartup Alley Hub, whichshowcases most of the early-stage companies who will exhibit at Disrupt London. Currently we list 130 companies, and in the next two weeks we will add 200+ more. Last year we had 200 top European startups at the show, and this year we expect about 400 over two days.

Among them will be select group of startups in the FinTech, AI, and Health/Bio Tech categories, winners of a special, worldwide competition to offer 14 of the best startups in those categories a free spot on the floor. In addition, these companies will have an opportunity to present their startup on our Showcase Stage in the heart of the conference floor during the show. In all, we expect about 15-20 startups in each of those three categories. And here are the winners of the free spots.

Artificial Intelligence

FinTech

Health & BioTech

To top it all off, we will also have the 15 contestants in Startup Battlefield, our startup competition. More than 1,000 companies applied, and we will announce the final 15 on the first day of the show. They will join theranks of 623 amazing Battlefield companies(raised $6.6 billion and 81 exits)  and provide a lot of drama on stage as they face tough judges who are seasoned investors and founders. Once they are announced, the Battlefield companies will also be available to meet.

We’ll be updating the hub as more startups sign on, so keep checking back to discover new companies.You can search the Hub by day (Monday, Tuesday) and industry (logistics, financial services, health, education, fashion, SaaS, and more). The majority of the startups exhibiting will swap out each day, so be sure to see which companies showcase on which day. For extra ease of research, you’ll be able to find their company bio, CrunchBase profile, investment info, and contact information.

So how, exactly, will we help you connect with founders? That’s where our programCrunchMatch, comes in.

What is CrunchMatch?

This year we launched CrunchMatch to help match investors and founders who might make a good fit. The program was very successful at our Disrupts in New York and San Francisco earlier this year. We are bringing it to London for the first time this December.

Here’s how it works: When an investorregisters for Disrupt, they will receive an invitation to fill out a questionnaire about their investment interests. Investors can also peruse the Startup Alley Hub and indicate startups they’d like to meet from that list.

TechCrunch will use those specific requests and questionnaire responses to provide investors with concierge treatment to connect them with companies that fit their investment profile and interest areas. We’ll also help coordinate those meetings at a private space and at a time that works for both parties during the course of the Disrupt conference.

Investor Breakfast

Want to compare notes with other investors at Disrupt? Join us on Monday, Dec. 5 for an Investor Breakfast. This breakfast is a way for TechCrunch to bring together investors registered for Disrupt to network with each other and with the TechCrunch team. An invitation to the Investor Breakfast will come in the weeks preceding Disrupt once an investor has registered for a ticket to the conference. The TechCrunch team will make a brief presentation and take questions from attendees.

What Are You Waiting For?

The Startup Alley Hub gives you a first look at the innovative startups you’ll find at Disrupt London, so get your tickets now while prices are still low.Tickets are just £950per person for investors – but only until Nov. 4. And if you’re a startup who wants in on the action, you can secure your exhibit package for as low as £650 which includes two tickets plus one day of exhibition space.