Will technology prevent the next food shortage crisis?

Ifa simulation by the Center for Naval Analyses(CNA) has it right, mankind is inching toward a dystopian future wherefoodshortagewilltrigger riots and wars. That might be stretching it a bit, but the upcomingfoodshortagecrisisis serious, and the CNA, a federally funded research and development center, believesfoodproductionwillpermanently fall short of consumption.

With the UN estimatingan extra 2-3 billion mouths to feedby 2050 andclimate change undermining crop production by 2 percent per decade, the prospects of preventing thecrisisin time look bleak. Meanwhile, with urbanization of life andmore humans moving to live in cities, therewillalso be a workforce shortage on farms.

This is not the first time we humans are dealing with famine andfoodshortage. We’ve been fighting it our entire history. In previous eras, inventions like fertilizers and mechanized farming helped us find ways to tap into more resources and produce morefoodto address our needs.

But now, resources are becoming more scarce, and we need breakthroughs thatwillhelp make more efficient use of whatever we already have at hand.

According to scientists, the answer might be found in a new age of digital technologies that have proven their worth in different fields and have the potential to transform agriculture andfoodproduction and meet the consumption needs of the growing human population before we’re driven to eat cockroaches — or worse, each other.

Traditional agriculture is based on performing particular tasks, such as planting and harvesting, based on a predetermined schedule. Under this model, there’s minimal control over damage and waste.

However, recent technological advances have gone a long way toward making “precision farming” possible, which involves gathering real-time data and obtaining actionable insights that can specify what exactly needs to be done at each location at any given time.

“Precision Agriculture can transform thefoodindustry to be more efficient, less costly, and more sustainable,” says Paul Chang, Global Supply Chain Expert atIBM. “By utilizing IoT platforms to gather various sensor data and integrate with predictive analytics, the industry can take actions to maximize yield, minimize losses, and ensure sustainable practices.”

“Digital advancements intechnologyare able to make agriculture more productive and can help stabilize crops,” says Kai Goerlich, Digital Futures Research Director atSAP. “Sensors and real-time analytics can be used to optimize the planting, growing, harvesting, and transporting offoodcommodities.”

One such platform is SAP’s Digital Farming, which connects farmers, agricultural manufacturers and suppliers alike. “Crucial data from across entire farms are now collected and analyzed by a single cloud platform, which makes farming more efficient and sustainable,” Goerlich says.

“Today’s large and local farms can leverage IoT to remotely monitor sensors that detect soil moisture, crop growth and livestock feed levels, remotely manage and control their irrigation equipment, and combine operational data with third party information,” saysWillYapp, vice president of Business Development atSenet, a Low Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN) service provider.

The combination, Yapp says, offers new ways to use empirical data to improve operational planning and decision making.Senet’s sensors operate over Low Power, Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) to reduce the costs of deployment and connectivity over long ranges. “[LPWAN sensors] are ideal for gathering data about local agricultural and environmental conditions supporting IoT applications designed to increase the quality, quantity, sustainability and cost effectiveness of agricultural production,” Yapp says.The data generated by these sensors can be used to improve precision farming, such as applying water to areas where the moisture of soil has dropped instead of wasting water in areas that don’t need it, Yapp explains. “An IoT-managed watering system can considerably decrease consumption while at the same time increasing yields,” he says.IBM’s Chang also presents scenarios where emerging technologies can help unlock the power of precision farming, such as the combination of video-capturing drones and cloud-based analytics software that can show the current conditions of crops and assist farmers in taking actions that can impact the growth curve of the crops.Leveraging weather forecast dataBeing able to integrate weather forecasts into the farming process is also a vital component of precision farming. “Precisely monitoring incoming weather condition can help ensure that water is only used when necessary,” Chang says.“Ninety percent of all crop losses are due to weather,” adds Carrie Gillespie, Agriculture Lead forThe Weather Company, an IBM business. This is especially important as climate change is starting to take its toll on crops and farming in different areas across the world. “By integrating weather forecast models into crop planting and harvesting, better decisions can be made in advance,” Gillespie says.The Weather Company helps farmers be more efficient and profitable in the field by leveraging micro-weather data for predictive modeling in the cloud.The correct use of weather and soil data can give insights into when and how much to irrigate, or how to increase crop yield while reducing the use of pesticide and fertilizer, Gillespie explains.The use of analytics and machine learningtechnologycan also enable disease and pest prediction and help growerspreventthe loss of crops and tune their use of chemicals.This practice is being applied by Seven Springs Farm in Cadiz, Kentucky, which uses cloud-based software systems hosted by tractor manufacturer John Deere to improve its corn crop yield. “The farm uses an app to calibrate fertilizer purchases according to weather predictions, reducing runoff,” says SAP’s Goerlich, whose company is involved in the initiative. “We have also seen an increase of agricultural institutes implement apps to assist with weather predictions that in return create a greater amount of crops that are safe to consume.”“The ‘art of farming’ should be augmented with the ‘science of farming’ where the farmers can use data and predictive analytics to make the best decisions,” Chang says. “These technologies can now be easily consumed by individuals by leveraging mobile devices so that everyone in the world, including those in the developing countries, can have access to the latest technologies available to others.”Improving distribution and optimizing the supply chainIntegrating weather forecasts into the agriculture process also helps improve the logistics around harvesting and transportation. Weather and soil analytics can predict and specify when fieldswillbe least affected by the weight of harvesting equipment and which fields workers should be deployed to. It can also help predict which distribution routeswillbe affected by rain and upcoming weather changes, especially in countries where roads are dirt and heavy rain can cause trucks to get stuck in mud.“A lot offoodwaste happens during distribution, so it’s important to transport thefoodat the right temperature and not hold it for longer than needed,” Gillespie says.Product recalls also contribute to damage and waste — and they happen a lot. Asstudies suggest, in many cases, up to 50 percent of recalledfooditems are not contaminated, which ramps up costs and causes a lot of goodfoodto go to waste. The reason is that there isn’t enough visibility into the supply chain. Federal regulations mandate that firms have traceability one step up and down the supply chain, but this isn’t sufficient forfooditems and perishable products, which move very quickly across the chain.“In a recall, understanding the origin of the contamination and its reach is critical in helping topreventuntainted product from being wasted and discarded unnecessarily,” says Dean Wiltse, CEO atFoodLogiQ, a software company that helps promotefoodsafety through traceability and sustainability.FoodLogiQ aims to provide increased visibility across the supply chain by capturing and storing data at each step of the journey, and providing customers with an interface that enables them to scan products and gain immediate access to their supply chain history, as opposed to the traditional manual processes and spreadsheets involved with supply chain management.“End-to-end traceability minimizesfoodwaste in product recalls by helping companies realize efficiency and uncover visibility across their supply chain,” Wiltse says. “End-to-end traceability can help identify the source of the outbreak, trace back each step in the supply chain — all the way to the exact farm, batch, and container.”The streamlined supply chain managementwillhelp avoid discarding uncontaminatedfood, Wiltse believes, and alsopreventdelays that can impactfoodquality.On-demandfoodprintingIn the near future, we might be producing ourfoodin a totally different way, suggests Jordan French, CMO at 3Dfoodprinting startupBeeHex. “3D printingtechnologyconstitutes the perfect opportunity to eliminate inefficiencies across thefoodmarket by dramatically reducingfoodspoilage during the supply chain while bolstering the consumer’s ability to personalize according to her wants and needs,” he says.Whilefoodprinting is often viewed as a luxurytechnology, French explains that it has interesting use cases that can help reduce costs and work labor. “Looking towards the future, 3D printingtechnologywillprovide thefoodmarket a direct bridge from production to consumption,” he says.For example, after being harvested, fruits travel through storage units, packaging facilities and lengthy distribution channels before finally arriving at a grocery store. “This process expends an incredible amount of energy to keep the product fresh,” French says, “and still about 16 percent of all fruits and veggies are lost before ever reaching the dinner table.”In a revolutionized supply chain, French explains, fruits are converted into their powdered micronutrient form immediately after harvest, which allows for easy transportation without the risk of decomposition traditionally imposed by fully hydrated pieces of fruit.“From here, the consumer would simply use a 3D printer to reassemble the produce into its original, palatable form — using less energy and producing less waste in the process,” he concludes.The changes overcoming the green planet will impose a new order in the production, distribution and consumption of food in the coming decades. If the past is any indication, emerging technologies will help humanity overcome food shortage just as it did in past cycles. The question is whether it will do so in time to prevent a crisis from developing.

The combination, Yapp says, offers new ways to use empirical data to improve operational planning and decision making.

Senet’s sensors operate over Low Power, Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) to reduce the costs of deployment and connectivity over long ranges. “[LPWAN sensors] are ideal for gathering data about local agricultural and environmental conditions supporting IoT applications designed to increase the quality, quantity, sustainability and cost effectiveness of agricultural production,” Yapp says.

The data generated by these sensors can be used to improve precision farming, such as applying water to areas where the moisture of soil has dropped instead of wasting water in areas that don’t need it, Yapp explains. “An IoT-managed watering system can considerably decrease consumption while at the same time increasing yields,” he says.

IBM’s Chang also presents scenarios where emerging technologies can help unlock the power of precision farming, such as the combination of video-capturing drones and cloud-based analytics software that can show the current conditions of crops and assist farmers in taking actions that can impact the growth curve of the crops.

Being able to integrate weather forecasts into the farming process is also a vital component of precision farming. “Precisely monitoring incoming weather condition can help ensure that water is only used when necessary,” Chang says.

“Ninety percent of all crop losses are due to weather,” adds Carrie Gillespie, Agriculture Lead forThe Weather Company, an IBM business. This is especially important as climate change is starting to take its toll on crops and farming in different areas across the world. “By integrating weather forecast models into crop planting and harvesting, better decisions can be made in advance,” Gillespie says.

The Weather Company helps farmers be more efficient and profitable in the field by leveraging micro-weather data for predictive modeling in the cloud.

The correct use of weather and soil data can give insights into when and how much to irrigate, or how to increase crop yield while reducing the use of pesticide and fertilizer, Gillespie explains.The use of analytics and machine learningtechnologycan also enable disease and pest prediction and help growerspreventthe loss of crops and tune their use of chemicals.This practice is being applied by Seven Springs Farm in Cadiz, Kentucky, which uses cloud-based software systems hosted by tractor manufacturer John Deere to improve its corn crop yield. “The farm uses an app to calibrate fertilizer purchases according to weather predictions, reducing runoff,” says SAP’s Goerlich, whose company is involved in the initiative. “We have also seen an increase of agricultural institutes implement apps to assist with weather predictions that in return create a greater amount of crops that are safe to consume.”“The ‘art of farming’ should be augmented with the ‘science of farming’ where the farmers can use data and predictive analytics to make the best decisions,” Chang says. “These technologies can now be easily consumed by individuals by leveraging mobile devices so that everyone in the world, including those in the developing countries, can have access to the latest technologies available to others.”Improving distribution and optimizing the supply chainIntegrating weather forecasts into the agriculture process also helps improve the logistics around harvesting and transportation. Weather and soil analytics can predict and specify when fieldswillbe least affected by the weight of harvesting equipment and which fields workers should be deployed to. It can also help predict which distribution routeswillbe affected by rain and upcoming weather changes, especially in countries where roads are dirt and heavy rain can cause trucks to get stuck in mud.“A lot offoodwaste happens during distribution, so it’s important to transport thefoodat the right temperature and not hold it for longer than needed,” Gillespie says.Product recalls also contribute to damage and waste — and they happen a lot. Asstudies suggest, in many cases, up to 50 percent of recalledfooditems are not contaminated, which ramps up costs and causes a lot of goodfoodto go to waste. The reason is that there isn’t enough visibility into the supply chain. Federal regulations mandate that firms have traceability one step up and down the supply chain, but this isn’t sufficient forfooditems and perishable products, which move very quickly across the chain.“In a recall, understanding the origin of the contamination and its reach is critical in helping topreventuntainted product from being wasted and discarded unnecessarily,” says Dean Wiltse, CEO atFoodLogiQ, a software company that helps promotefoodsafety through traceability and sustainability.FoodLogiQ aims to provide increased visibility across the supply chain by capturing and storing data at each step of the journey, and providing customers with an interface that enables them to scan products and gain immediate access to their supply chain history, as opposed to the traditional manual processes and spreadsheets involved with supply chain management.“End-to-end traceability minimizesfoodwaste in product recalls by helping companies realize efficiency and uncover visibility across their supply chain,” Wiltse says. “End-to-end traceability can help identify the source of the outbreak, trace back each step in the supply chain — all the way to the exact farm, batch, and container.”The streamlined supply chain managementwillhelp avoid discarding uncontaminatedfood, Wiltse believes, and alsopreventdelays that can impactfoodquality.On-demandfoodprintingIn the near future, we might be producing ourfoodin a totally different way, suggests Jordan French, CMO at 3Dfoodprinting startupBeeHex. “3D printingtechnologyconstitutes the perfect opportunity to eliminate inefficiencies across thefoodmarket by dramatically reducingfoodspoilage during the supply chain while bolstering the consumer’s ability to personalize according to her wants and needs,” he says.Whilefoodprinting is often viewed as a luxurytechnology, French explains that it has interesting use cases that can help reduce costs and work labor. “Looking towards the future, 3D printingtechnologywillprovide thefoodmarket a direct bridge from production to consumption,” he says.For example, after being harvested, fruits travel through storage units, packaging facilities and lengthy distribution channels before finally arriving at a grocery store. “This process expends an incredible amount of energy to keep the product fresh,” French says, “and still about 16 percent of all fruits and veggies are lost before ever reaching the dinner table.”In a revolutionized supply chain, French explains, fruits are converted into their powdered micronutrient form immediately after harvest, which allows for easy transportation without the risk of decomposition traditionally imposed by fully hydrated pieces of fruit.“From here, the consumer would simply use a 3D printer to reassemble the produce into its original, palatable form — using less energy and producing less waste in the process,” he concludes.The changes overcoming the green planet will impose a new order in the production, distribution and consumption of food in the coming decades. If the past is any indication, emerging technologies will help humanity overcome food shortage just as it did in past cycles. The question is whether it will do so in time to prevent a crisis from developing.

The correct use of weather and soil data can give insights into when and how much to irrigate, or how to increase crop yield while reducing the use of pesticide and fertilizer, Gillespie explains.

The use of analytics and machine learningtechnologycan also enable disease and pest prediction and help growerspreventthe loss of crops and tune their use of chemicals.

This practice is being applied by Seven Springs Farm in Cadiz, Kentucky, which uses cloud-based software systems hosted by tractor manufacturer John Deere to improve its corn crop yield. “The farm uses an app to calibrate fertilizer purchases according to weather predictions, reducing runoff,” says SAP’s Goerlich, whose company is involved in the initiative. “We have also seen an increase of agricultural institutes implement apps to assist with weather predictions that in return create a greater amount of crops that are safe to consume.”

“The ‘art of farming’ should be augmented with the ‘science of farming’ where the farmers can use data and predictive analytics to make the best decisions,” Chang says. “These technologies can now be easily consumed by individuals by leveraging mobile devices so that everyone in the world, including those in the developing countries, can have access to the latest technologies available to others.”

Integrating weather forecasts into the agriculture process also helps improve the logistics around harvesting and transportation. Weather and soil analytics can predict and specify when fieldswillbe least affected by the weight of harvesting equipment and which fields workers should be deployed to. It can also help predict which distribution routeswillbe affected by rain and upcoming weather changes, especially in countries where roads are dirt and heavy rain can cause trucks to get stuck in mud.

“A lot offoodwaste happens during distribution, so it’s important to transport thefoodat the right temperature and not hold it for longer than needed,” Gillespie says.

Product recalls also contribute to damage and waste — and they happen a lot. Asstudies suggest, in many cases, up to 50 percent of recalledfooditems are not contaminated, which ramps up costs and causes a lot of goodfoodto go to waste. The reason is that there isn’t enough visibility into the supply chain. Federal regulations mandate that firms have traceability one step up and down the supply chain, but this isn’t sufficient forfooditems and perishable products, which move very quickly across the chain.

“In a recall, understanding the origin of the contamination and its reach is critical in helping topreventuntainted product from being wasted and discarded unnecessarily,” says Dean Wiltse, CEO atFoodLogiQ, a software company that helps promotefoodsafety through traceability and sustainability.

FoodLogiQ aims to provide increased visibility across the supply chain by capturing and storing data at each step of the journey, and providing customers with an interface that enables them to scan products and gain immediate access to their supply chain history, as opposed to the traditional manual processes and spreadsheets involved with supply chain management.“End-to-end traceability minimizesfoodwaste in product recalls by helping companies realize efficiency and uncover visibility across their supply chain,” Wiltse says. “End-to-end traceability can help identify the source of the outbreak, trace back each step in the supply chain — all the way to the exact farm, batch, and container.”The streamlined supply chain managementwillhelp avoid discarding uncontaminatedfood, Wiltse believes, and alsopreventdelays that can impactfoodquality.On-demandfoodprintingIn the near future, we might be producing ourfoodin a totally different way, suggests Jordan French, CMO at 3Dfoodprinting startupBeeHex. “3D printingtechnologyconstitutes the perfect opportunity to eliminate inefficiencies across thefoodmarket by dramatically reducingfoodspoilage during the supply chain while bolstering the consumer’s ability to personalize according to her wants and needs,” he says.Whilefoodprinting is often viewed as a luxurytechnology, French explains that it has interesting use cases that can help reduce costs and work labor. “Looking towards the future, 3D printingtechnologywillprovide thefoodmarket a direct bridge from production to consumption,” he says.For example, after being harvested, fruits travel through storage units, packaging facilities and lengthy distribution channels before finally arriving at a grocery store. “This process expends an incredible amount of energy to keep the product fresh,” French says, “and still about 16 percent of all fruits and veggies are lost before ever reaching the dinner table.”In a revolutionized supply chain, French explains, fruits are converted into their powdered micronutrient form immediately after harvest, which allows for easy transportation without the risk of decomposition traditionally imposed by fully hydrated pieces of fruit.“From here, the consumer would simply use a 3D printer to reassemble the produce into its original, palatable form — using less energy and producing less waste in the process,” he concludes.The changes overcoming the green planet will impose a new order in the production, distribution and consumption of food in the coming decades. If the past is any indication, emerging technologies will help humanity overcome food shortage just as it did in past cycles. The question is whether it will do so in time to prevent a crisis from developing.

FoodLogiQ aims to provide increased visibility across the supply chain by capturing and storing data at each step of the journey, and providing customers with an interface that enables them to scan products and gain immediate access to their supply chain history, as opposed to the traditional manual processes and spreadsheets involved with supply chain management.

“End-to-end traceability minimizesfoodwaste in product recalls by helping companies realize efficiency and uncover visibility across their supply chain,” Wiltse says. “End-to-end traceability can help identify the source of the outbreak, trace back each step in the supply chain — all the way to the exact farm, batch, and container.”

The streamlined supply chain managementwillhelp avoid discarding uncontaminatedfood, Wiltse believes, and alsopreventdelays that can impactfoodquality.

In the near future, we might be producing ourfoodin a totally different way, suggests Jordan French, CMO at 3Dfoodprinting startupBeeHex. “3D printingtechnologyconstitutes the perfect opportunity to eliminate inefficiencies across thefoodmarket by dramatically reducingfoodspoilage during the supply chain while bolstering the consumer’s ability to personalize according to her wants and needs,” he says.

Whilefoodprinting is often viewed as a luxurytechnology, French explains that it has interesting use cases that can help reduce costs and work labor. “Looking towards the future, 3D printingtechnologywillprovide thefoodmarket a direct bridge from production to consumption,” he says.For example, after being harvested, fruits travel through storage units, packaging facilities and lengthy distribution channels before finally arriving at a grocery store. “This process expends an incredible amount of energy to keep the product fresh,” French says, “and still about 16 percent of all fruits and veggies are lost before ever reaching the dinner table.”In a revolutionized supply chain, French explains, fruits are converted into their powdered micronutrient form immediately after harvest, which allows for easy transportation without the risk of decomposition traditionally imposed by fully hydrated pieces of fruit.“From here, the consumer would simply use a 3D printer to reassemble the produce into its original, palatable form — using less energy and producing less waste in the process,” he concludes.The changes overcoming the green planet will impose a new order in the production, distribution and consumption of food in the coming decades. If the past is any indication, emerging technologies will help humanity overcome food shortage just as it did in past cycles. The question is whether it will do so in time to prevent a crisis from developing.

Whilefoodprinting is often viewed as a luxurytechnology, French explains that it has interesting use cases that can help reduce costs and work labor. “Looking towards the future, 3D printingtechnologywillprovide thefoodmarket a direct bridge from production to consumption,” he says.

For example, after being harvested, fruits travel through storage units, packaging facilities and lengthy distribution channels before finally arriving at a grocery store. “This process expends an incredible amount of energy to keep the product fresh,” French says, “and still about 16 percent of all fruits and veggies are lost before ever reaching the dinner table.”

In a revolutionized supply chain, French explains, fruits are converted into their powdered micronutrient form immediately after harvest, which allows for easy transportation without the risk of decomposition traditionally imposed by fully hydrated pieces of fruit.

“From here, the consumer would simply use a 3D printer to reassemble the produce into its original, palatable form — using less energy and producing less waste in the process,” he concludes.

The changes overcoming the green planet will impose a new order in the production, distribution and consumption of food in the coming decades. If the past is any indication, emerging technologies will help humanity overcome food shortage just as it did in past cycles. The question is whether it will do so in time to prevent a crisis from developing.