Twitter will live stream the Golden Globes’ red carpet pre-show

The Golden Globes’ red carpet is coming to Twitter. That’s right: not the award show itself, but rather the pre-show event where the celebs walk the red carpet and are interviewed by Hollywood press with questions about what they’re wearing, and who they want to win, among other things. Now, Twitter users will be able get in on that action, too. The new deal will also see Twitter collaborating with the Hollywood Foreign Press in order to source questions from fans’ tweets.

“The HFPA Presents: Globes Red Carpet Live,” is the official pre-show for the “74th Annual Golden Globe Awards,” and will be live streamed on Twitter on Jan. 8 from 6-8 pm ET (3-5 pm PT).

The Twitter stream will include a combination of exclusive interviews with celebrities (hosts TBA), celebrity content from Twitter, and the live video feed from the red carpet event.

According to the companies’ announcement, Twitter users will be able to post their questions, and some selection of these will be included in the interviews during the pre-show.

“Twitter is where the conversation about the Golden Globes happens. Viewers tweet along before, during and after the award show,” said Anthony Noto, COO at Twitter, in a statement about the streaming deal. “Our collaboration with The Hollywood Foreign Press Association and dick clark productions for this red carpet show will bring high quality live content and commentary to the masses through Twitter.”

The live stream will be available for both Twitter users and non-users alike. The former can watch the event in the Twitter feature called Moments, as with Twitter’s prior streaming deals. Meanwhile, Twitter users as well as those without a Twitter account can visitgoldenglobes.twitter.comon the web or the @goldenglobes Twitter account to follow along.

Twitter will sell advertising against this live stream, as it has with other live events on its platform, including its live-streamed NFL broadcasts.

As part of Twitter’s attempt to win more users, the company has focused heavily this year on bringing live events to the platform through a series of streaming deals. In addition tothe NFL,Twitter has worked with the MLB,NBA, NHL,Wimbledon, and other sports organizations; streamed theDemocratic and Republican National conventions with CBS, plus news fromBloombergandCheddar; among others.

More recently, Twitter debuted a live stream of a more entertaining nature, when it hosted People’slive Q&A with the cast of “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.”

Gaining the rights to stream the red carpet for a major awards show is another fairly high-profile win for Twitter.

Some events, like theNFL gamesand thelive-streamed debates, have seen several million viewers tuning in, which makes them a great way to boost Twitter traffic and ad revenue. However, none of these events have helped the company actually boost its user base, which is why Twitter’s streams have been viewable by logged-out users, too.

Image credit: Getty Images/Mark Davis/NBC