Watch Microsoft Accelerator’s London Demo Day here

TechCrunch is pleased to bring you Microsoft Accelerator’s London Demo Day on June 30th from 7:30-10:00am PT, 3:30-6pm GMT.

The Microsoft Accelerator is an immersive three- to six-month program aimed at helping entrepreneurs get through the challenges of building a company, finding customers and scaling to global markets. There are seven accelerators located around the world, from Seattle to Beijing, from Berlin to Tel-Aviv. Programs have a focus on enterprise startups; this event in London showcases financial services, fitness, education and more.

Investors and press will hear pitches from 11 companies starting at 7:30am PT. Each team will have two minutes to present their business followed by questions from the moderator and then a question from the audience. You can watch it right here.

Capitalise– Enables SMEs and their trusted advisors to find, compare and select the right lenders in under three minutes.

Nivaura– Enables the issuance, execution and administration of complex financial products. They change the deal­flow economics, allowing investment and wholesale banks to make smaller deals more profitable, for example EMTNs. They help banks increase their profits and allow them to engage with the clients they care about at an earlier stage.

FitWell– A mobile coaching app, that makes the journey to becoming fit and healthy more simple by offering the user a digital personal trainer, nutritionist and life coach all in one app.

SIME Dx– Moving diagnostics from the bench to the bedside. SIME’s unique technology, combined with user conscious design, empowers healthcare teams to confidently carry out diagnostics at the point of care.

Furo– Streamlines the request for proposals (RFP) process for companies, and is already working with large clients around the globe.

Instanda– A management tool that empowers insurers, brokers and MGAs to build and launch any insurance product within unprecedented timescales, and then distribute and self­manage it online, globally.

Pinipa– Makes project oversight and communications easy, integrating with existing project management tools to provide a high level overview to share with stakeholders, and gather insight through reporting and analytics to work smarter with those stakeholders. Customers include Microsoft, LinkedIn, National Grid, Cancer Research and Staffordshire.

Altitude Angel– Accelerates the adoption and integration of drone technology into businesses by empowering manufacturers to access reliable, authoritative real­time data sources that help drones and their operators make better decisions about where and how to fly.

Apprecie– A UK company offering a unique technology and service for companies that need to acquire and retain high value clients. Apprecie facilitates better face-­to­-face engagement and is built with the sensitivities of high­-value clients at its core.

Dendrite.me– A social learning platform designed to enable teachers, students and parents to access outstanding, inspirational learning content from channel partners, and blend this content into their own teaching and learning experiences.

Glisser– Makes presentations interactive, and gathers data at live events. By live­sharing PowerPoint slides to audience smartphones, and engaging them with integrated Q&A, polling and social media feeds, they turn any presentation into an opportunity to capture information, feedback and leads.

Mention– Mention is Google Alerts on steroids. We monitor over 1 billion sources daily, which let’s you to monitor your brand, track competitors, manage crises, and generate leads.