PlayStation Vue brings its streaming TV service to Android TV, and soon, Mac & Windows

PlayStation Vue, Sony’s streaming TV service aimed at cord cutters, just got more useful. The companyannouncedthe service will now run on Android TV, and will arrive on both Mac and Windows PCs in the near future. What that means for those considering ditching their cable or satellite TV subscriptions, is that there’s now more ways to access PlayStation Vue without the need for a PlayStation console.

Instead, customers will be able to sign up for the web version for Mac and PC directly from the browser, then watch on the devices you own, whether that’s the desktop, Android TV, Roku, or iOS and Android smartphones and tablets.

On the Mac and PC version, Sony says that it will debut some unique features, including a mini-player that will let you shrink the video to the corner of the browser so you can watch while you’re doing other things on your computer.

No launch date for this service was yet provided.

PlayStation Vue competes more directly with services that aim to offer an internet version of what you miss from cable TV, like Sling TV, AT&T’s forthcoming DirecTV, and Hulu’s upcoming live TV service, for example.

The service offers tiered access to both on-demand programming and live cable TV, as well as movies and sports channels. Pricing is determined by which packages you choose.

These range from the “Access” package for 55+ channels, which costs $29.99 per month, all the way up to an “Ultra” package for $64.99 per month with over 100 channels, plus HBO and Showtime. (Packages cost $10 more in cities where live broadcasts are available.) “Core” and “Elite” packages expand the basic offerings with more sports and movie channels, at $34.99 per month and $44.99 per month, respectively.

There are some interesting features that Vue offers that make it stand out, including its cloud-based DVR which lets you schedule hundreds of shows at once, as well as its support for streaming on multiple devices at once. On Vue, you can stream on up to 5 devices, while Sling TV’s better plan (Sling Blue) only allows up to three streams.

It also combines on-demand streaming with live, local broadcasts in a number of markets, which gives you more of traditional TV-like experience, combined with the ability to watch your favorite shows at any time.

You can use PlayStation Vue now on your Android TVs running Android OS 4.4 or higher, including Nvidia’sSHIELD TV.