Amy Chang, Founder of Accompany the AI staff app, joins Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6. It’s literally the conference you watched on “Silicon Valley”, so you’d better be there. We’ve already announceda tonne of great speakers. Today we’re delighted to sayAmy Chang, CEO and Founder of Accompany — an intelligent, adaptive virtual chief of staff application — is coming.

Amy is a former Google exec who ran Google Analytics for 7 years, growing it from >1% to over 70% market share. She serves on the boards ofSplunk, served on Informatica’s board from 2012-2015, when it was taken private for $5.1 bn, and sat on Target’s Digital Advisory Council from 2013-2016. Early in her career she ran product for paid search and affiliates at eBay and worked as a consultant at McKinsey. She’s an advisor to Hubspot, Optimizely, ClearSlide, BloomReach, Skyhigh Networks, Origami Logic, Kanjoya, and Datorama, and holds a BS in Electrical Engineering from Stanford in hardware and an MS in Electrical Engineering from Stanford in network systems.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

Apply with your new startup for Battlefield for free here. There’s also theStartup Battlefield Scholarship Fundfor startups who have not raised funding! The Startup Battlefield application deadline has now been extended.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £800 a piece. Or sign up with a co-worker and you can save an additional £100 off each ticket with our multi-ticket (2+) discount. You can get your tickets at this price until September 16.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.