How international students are keeping US colleges afloat and powering the tech industry

Think back on your college experience and you may recall the presence of theInternationalHouse, an on-campus residence set aside forinternationalstudents. The fact that there was likely only a single house for all thestudentsprobably made you think your school didn’t have a largeinternationalcontingent.

Now consider the fact that nearly 1 million foreignstudentsare enrolled atcollegesand universities across the United States — a figure that has jumped40 percent in the past decade.

Asstudentsfrom across the world stream ontoU.S.college campuses, theseInternationalHouses increasingly make obvious the fact that foreignstudentsare not a “special interest” that can be neatly housed in one section of campus. Today, the opposite is true:internationalstudentsnot only make up an increasing share of the overallU.S.student population, but also single-handedly keep these institutionsafloatfinancially. Adding to this — amid considerable debate over aSTEM crisis in theU.S.—internationalstudentsare pursuing studies in science, technology, engineering and mathematics in record numbers, which in turn ispoweringtheU.S.techindustry.

The numbers oninternationalstudentsatU.S.collegesand universities are astounding:–

TheU.S.is host to thelargest proportionof the world’s 4.5 million college and universitystudents, almost double the number studying in the United Kingdom, the second biggest host.

Of the 974,926internationalstudentsin the 2015-2016 academic year, 586,208 were undergraduates, with more than 165,000 coming from China.

In 2016, 45 states hosted moreinternationalstudentscompared to the previous year, with five states witnessing double-digit growth rates. For example, Texas increased itsinternationalstudent population by 18 percent.

Eight institutions had more than 10,000 enrolledinternationalstudents,including New York University, University of Southern California and Columbia University.

The economic impact of the increasing growth ofinternationalstudentsin theU.S.is equally stunning. In the 2014-2015 school year,internationalstudentscontributed more than$30 billionto theU.S.economy and supportedmore than 373,000 jobs.

Since the 1950s, the United States has been the destination of choice for foreignstudentsseeking higher education. However, the explosive growth in recent years is no happy accident. The rapid arrival ofinternationalstudentsin theU.S.is coincident with the Great Recession, when public and private coffers tightened dramatically.

Investment in higher education from state and local governments dropped to a low point in 2012 ($71.9 billion). Since then, state and local government investment has grown to$91 billionin 2015, but that’s still below pre-recession levels. Meanwhile, as a result of declining investments since 2008, tuition and fees at both two-year and four-year public institutions rose28 percent.

Between 2008 and 2015,internationalstudentshave essentially functioned as the bailout forU.S.collegesand universities. This is largely because foreignstudentsoften pay two to three times the tuition and fees of domesticstudents, which helps compensate for declining subsidies and smaller budgets. Furthermore, most of theseinternationalstudentsdon’t require any financial assistance fromU.S.colleges. Around 72 percent of them receive the majority of their funds from personal and family income, as well as assistance from their home country governments or universities.

This trend is seen acrossU.S.college campuses.Internationalstudentsat Idaho State University, for instance, pay more than $20,000 a year in tuition, around 2.5 times more than what in-statestudentspay. At Purdue University in Indiana, the tuition paid byinternationalundergraduates amounts to almost half of all new revenue it has raised through tuition since 2007. At Oregon State University, where state subsidies per full-time college student dropped 45 percent in the past five years, theinternationalstudent population now exceeds 3,000 (up from 988 in 2008). This allowed them to add 300 tenure-track professors and expand enrollment to approximately 29,000students.

Once on campus, around40 percentofinternationalstudentsend up studying fields related to science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), creating a solid pipeline of talent for jobs in theU.S.technology sector. As recent research shows, immigrants already contribute heavily to theU.S.techindustry, having started more than half (44 of 87) of America’s startup companies valued at $1 billion dollars or more (“unicorns”). Specifically, nearly one-quarter ofU.S.unicorns had a founder who first came to America as aninternationalstudent, which shows their path to success often begins onU.S.college campuses.

Thus, in addition to addressing higher education budget woes and enrollment issues,internationalstudentsare also filling the STEM gap in the labor market. To retain its historical preeminence, theU.S.will need to produce approximately1 million more STEM professionalsbeyond the current rate over the next decade, according to the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Currently, there are 478,815internationalstudentsstudying STEM topics.

Collegesandtechcompanies may viewinternationalstudentsas a win-win situation, but that’s not to say the transition is easy. Tensions betweenU.S.studentsandinternationalones from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia at Idaho State Universityescalated this yearto the point of the Kuwait education ministry threatening to pullscholarshipsfollowing reports of discrimination and hate crimes. In 2012, the ChineseStudentsand Scholars Association at Purdue Universityorganized a proteston campus following fee hikes targeted atinternationalstudents, with signs that read “We are not cash cows!” A recent Wall Street Journalanalysisof dozens of large public universities revealed that in the 2014-2015 academic year, there were 5.1 reports of alleged cheating for every 100internationalstudents.

Internationalstudentsare fundamentally transformingU.S.higher education, but as recent events demonstrate, these young people are not here to simply foot the bill and silently create economic benefits to theU.S.economy. As the country gains more and morestudents(and eventual workers) from abroad, there are big questions around how institutions need to accommodate these populations and ease the growing pains, from student relations to housing to classrooms and syllabi to student bank accounts and credit cards to work visas.

Accommodating thesestudentsearly on will also have an impact on where they land their first jobs out of school.Techcompanies recruiting from the influx ofinternationalstudentswho are specializing in STEM fields would do well to understand thesestudents’ needs, desires and values — beyond what the typical American grad has presented to the job market. Immigrants may bepoweringthetechindustryas it stands, but we are miles away from truly harnessing their ideas and innovations at scale.