AirTV, a media player offering local channels and Sling TV pops up on Amazon

Dish Network’sSling TVhas so far offered a different way for cord cutters to subscribe to the “best of TV” via its online streaming TV service. However, that hasn’t included access to local channels that you receive over-the-air. But that may be changing, according to an Amazon listing which touts a new hardware device called AirTV. The device works with an antenna and Sling TV’s app in order to offer a combination of local live television programming and Sling TV’s content, including its program guide and optional add-on packages.

The Amazon listing was discovered byDave Zatz of Zatznotfunny.com, a blog that tracks cord cutting news and related products.Zatz had previously reported onthe forthcoming AirTV, which appears to be a collaboration between Dish Network’s Sling TV and Echostar subsidiary Sling Media. The box is basically a Slingbox device that replaces the Slingbox client software application with a Sling TV app instead, and then connects with an antenna for access to the OTA channels.

But after the rumored late spring launch date came and passed, Zatz believed the project may have been terminated, he said. Thenew Amazon listing(a draft, available via a web cache), may indicate otherwise, though.

The listing reads, in part:

With AirTV and an HD antenna, you can stream live local programming, news and your local sports anywhere in your home using the free Sling TV app and its integrated program guide. No paid contracts-just free local TV on any compatible device. And if you want more channels, you can subscribe to paid Sling TV packages-all from the same app.

You can watch AirTV from the Sling TV app on Android, iOS, Amazon Fire TV and Roku.Compatible with antennas such as: Mohu Wine Gard RCA …and all others

The Sling AirTV box is priced at $149.99.

Anotherpulled listing on B&H Photo(top photo) confirmed the same pricing, and stated that the box was expected to become available on September 17, 2016. There’s also a listing on the slingmedia.com store pagehere.

Sling has not yet responded to a request for comment.

Update: 6:50 PM ET – Sling declined to comment.