Tim Cook to Apple staff: We’ll ‘move forward together’ following Trump election win

Tim Cook has rallied staff at Apple following Donald Trump’s historic and controversial U.S. election win by reassuring them that the company will “move forward together” despite political divisions and tension.

As part of his campaign,Trump indicated his desire for Apple to manufacture its productsin the U.S., rather than China and other parts of the world. While it remains unclear if these comments form part of the President-elect’s policy on technology and business, the fact that he will enter the White House in January will be of concern to many at Apple. In response to that uncertainty, Cook told employees in a company-wide memo —reported by BuzzFeed— to “be confident that Apple’s North Star hasn’t changed.”

“Our products connect people everywhere, and they provide the tools for our customers to do great things to improve their lives and the world at large,” the Apple CEO added.

But it isn’t just the future of Apple — or any other U.S. company — that has been shaken by the election result. The campaign itself has created divides and tensions among the U.S. population, and that includes Apple’s own staff, whichnumbers some 76,000 direct hiresin the country.

“Regardless of which candidate each of us supported as individuals, the only way to move forward is to move forward together,” Cook said in the memo.

“Our company is open to all, and we celebrate the diversity of our team here in the United States and around the world — regardless of what they look like, where they come from, how they worship or who they love,” he added.

Here’s Cook’s full letter below. Note that he didn’t reference Trump by name, nor his comments about Apple:

Team,

I’ve heard from many of you today about the presidential election. In a political contest where the candidates were so different and each received a similar number of popular votes, it’s inevitable that the aftermath leaves many of you with strong feelings.

We have a very diverse team of employees, including supporters of each of the candidates. Regardless of which candidate each of us supported as individuals, the only way to move forward is to move forward together. I recall something Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. said 50 years ago: “If you can’t fly, then run. If you can’t run, then walk. If you can’t walk, then crawl, but whatever you do you have to keep moving forward.” This advice is timeless, and a reminder that we only do great work and improve the world by moving forward.

While there is discussion today about uncertainties ahead, you can be confident that Apple’s North Star hasn’t changed. Our products connect people everywhere, and they provide the tools for our customers to do great things to improve their lives and the world at large. Our company is open to all, and we celebrate the diversity of our team here in the United States and around the world — regardless of what they look like, where they come from, how they worship or who they love.I’ve always looked at Apple as one big family and I encourage you to reach out to your co-workers if they are feeling anxious.

Let’s move forward — together!

Best,

Tim