Only 4 days left to save £250 on Disrupt London tickets

Attention, Disrupt procrastinators. The time to pay attention is now. You have just 4 days left to get early-bird tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £950 apiece, saving yourself a full £250 off the final ticket price of £1,200.

So, what are you waiting for? Be sure to head over to our ticketing page no later than this Friday, November 4 to get your early-bird Disrupt tickets before prices increase. You can get those ticketshere.

That ticket is your all-access pass to everything that makes Disrupt great. You’ll get to connect with the hundreds of early-stage startups displaying their wares in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, and check out the few dozen companies in the Startup Battlefield competition vying for $50,000 (about £40,600), the coveted Disrupt Cup and, perhaps more importantly, the attention of the tech community at large.

You’ll also get to learn from some top-notch innovators, investors and entrepreneurs in the series of lectures and interviews that we have lined up throughout the course of the three-day event. People like Lending Club founder Renaud Laplanche, Russian model, philanthropist and occasional film actress Natalia Mikhailovna Vodianova (aka Supernova), and Citymapper Limited founder Azmat Yusuf, to name but a few.

And, after a long day of perusing, learning, and networking, what better way to unwind than by attending the after-parties that keep the good times going long after the show floor has closed up for the day?

Of course, to do any of it, you’re going to need a ticket, and the best, most wallet-friendly way to get into Disrupt is by getting your Disrupt tickets at our early-bird price points, so save yourselves the headache and the £250 and get your tickets today.

You can get themhere.

Disrupt London takes place December 5-6 at London’s beautiful Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see all of you fine folks at Disrupt next month.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.