Don’t forget to nominate your favorite startup, founder or VC for a Crunchie award

Stop procrastinating and spend a few minutesto get in your nominationsfor the annual Crunchies award show. It only takes a few minutes to fill out the form. Nominations will close on Thursday, November 3, 2016 so do it today.

We’re looking for the input of the tech community. Who was the hottest new startup? Who launched the best new technology? Which company had the best launch video? There are 11 categories in all.

This is the 10th anniversary of the Crunchies and we’re thrilled to put the show on again. Like last year, the winners will be decided by a large panel of experts. Called the Crunchies Board, this group includes TechCrunch editors, alongside entrepreneurs, investors and other tech notables, including speakers and judges who have appeared on the Disrupt stage. An independent third-party will administer and tally the ballots, as well as keep the results secret until the awards are announced onstage.

Pleasehead over to the show pageand startnominating your favoritecandidates in the categories provided. Nominations will close on Thursday, November 3, 2016.

General admission tickets will be available when the show is a bit closer. We’ll see you at the Crunchies!

Hot New Startup

The young standout startup of the year

Best Technology

An exceptional recent technological achievement

Best App

A recent standout that has earned a place on your home screen

Best Startup Video

Best launch or explanatory video by a startup

Hardware of the Year

Breakout hardware product of the year

TechCrunch Include Award

An organization or individual that has advanced inclusion in tech

Social Impact

A company that has excelled in using technology to advance social impact

Founder of the Year

A founder that has made a statement in leadership or execution this year

Angel Investor of the Year

A breakout portfolio

VC of the Year

An investor whose bets on founders and companies have borne fruit this year

Best Overall Startup

A star startup in all categories

We’ll be releasing tickets for the 10th annual Crunchies in November. If you want to be notified, sign up for our newsletterhere. We hope to see you there.

Our sponsors help make the Crunchies happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.