9 tricks to appear smart in brainstorming meetings

The following is an excerpt from Sarah Cooper’s new book,100 Tricks to Appear Smart in Meetings (October 4, Andrews McMeel)

In a brainstorming meeting, the pressure of coming up with incrediblenew ideas can be debilitating. Luckily, the last thing most corporationswant is new ideas.

During these largely pointless exercises, the point is to contribute using the mere gravitas of your presence, make other people’s ideas seem like your ideas, and look like a true leader by questioning the efficiency of the whole process.

Here are 9 tricks to make you look like you’re the creative force on your team.

Just before the meeting starts, get up and ask if anyone needsanything. People will think you’re so thoughtful, kind, and giving, plusyou’ll be able to disappear for 10 minutes no questions asked. Even ifno one wants anything, return with bottles of water, soda, and snacks.

Your colleagues will feel compelled to start drinking and snacking, andyour foresight will make them think you can really predict the future.

While the topics are being introduced, grab one of those sticky notepads and start drawing meaningless flowcharts. Your colleagues willlook over at you with worried interest, wondering how you’re comingup with so many complex ideas even before you know what thismeeting is for.

When everyone is trying to define the problem, make an analogyabout baking a cake, or something just as completely unrelated. Yourcolleagues will nod their heads in agreement, even if they really don’tunderstand how what you’re saying is related to what they’re talkingabout. Talking completely over their heads will make you seem wildlytranscendent and intimidatingly creative, even though the truth is youreally just like cake.

Nothing makes you seem smarter than when you question thequestions by asking if they’re the right questions. If someone respondsby asking you what you think the right questions are, say you justasked one.

Sidebar: How to strategically shoot down small ideas

Wonder if an idea seems too small so your colleagues see you as a big thinker and a gamechanger.

Use one of these phrases:

Using an idiom to question an idea is a subtle, smart way ofquestioning it. Here are some idioms to choose from:

Develop a quirky habit that ‘helps you think’ and ‘gets your creativejuices flowing.’ This could be anything from showing up in yourpyjamas, meditating on the floor, jogging on the spot, throwing aball against the wall, air drumming with your favourite drumsticks,or all of those things at the same time. Even if you’re not actuallycoming up with any ideas, your colleagues will be intimidated by youruncontrollable creative energy.

Sidebar: How to strategically shoot down big ideas

Wonder if an idea seems too big so your superiors see how much you care about company resources.

Use one of these phrases:

Make your colleagues think that you have a very close relationshipwith the CEO by bringing up how you think she would respond to anidea. Mention your CEO by her first name. Say you might run this byher during your next powwow. Congratulate everyone for coming upwith something she’d like. By associating yourself so closely with theCEO, people will start to think of you as some kind of CEO-in-training.

You will always appear as if you’re thinking bigger than everyoneelse by bringing up a framework for moving forward, or a model ofthinking, or how we can turn this into a platform. It’s a very meta wayof blowing everyone’s minds and masking the fact that you have noidea what everyone’s talking about.

There’ll come a point when everyone seems to be really excited aboutan idea or direction. At this point you should try to be the first personto yell out ‘Ship it!’ Sure, it’s a funny thing to say that will make peoplelaugh, but doing this will also convey some authority on your partto both end the meeting and make a final decision, even though youhave no power to do either.

100 Tricks to Appear Smart in Meetingswill be released October 4th.Pre-order it hereand read more at100Tricks.com.