The future of 3D-printed prosthetics

The recent ubiquity of3Dprinters and innovations in prosthetic design, manufacturing and distribution offer a viable solution for the millions of people living with limb loss around the world. In the United States alone, close to 200,000 amputations are performed each year, yet, withprostheticspriced from $5,000-$50,000, having one can almost be considered a luxury.

Traditionally, the process of getting a prosthetic limb can take anywhere from weeks to months. Becauseprostheticsare such personal items, each one has to (or should) be custom-made or fit to the needs of the wearer. However, as3Dprinters become more affordable, with some available forless than $200, the possibility of anyone being able to design and print a prosthetic limb in their home or local community is rapidly becoming a reality.

To fully appreciate the cost of prosthetic limbs, we can look at the economics of a family with a child in need. On average, each prosthetic has a lifespan of five years, and when considering younger children who are growing every day and are prone to breaking things, more frequent replacements are required.

Once you calculate the price of the prosthetic and its subsequent replacements, the total lifetime cost could place a considerable amount of strain on a family’s finances. Not to mention, it is also almost impossible to get insurance companies to cover that cost annually —CNN recently reporteda new Medicare proposal that would limit access to limbs (currently, there are 150,000 amputees in the system).

The democratization of prosthetic design and creation through3Dprinting enables millions of people around the world to reap the benefits of the newly popularized manufacturing technology. Open-source initiatives such asThe Enable Community Foundationlet anyone with a3Dprinter customize and create a prosthetic hand. Those on the Enable team, a global network of passionate volunteers, are using3Dprinting to give the world a helping hand, and it only costs $50.

With3Dprinting, kids can create a prosthetic based on their needs, such as an extendable arm that allows him or her toreach down effortlessly to pick upitems off the floor. Akin to printing a document, printing a prosthetic is quickly becoming as easy as pressing “print” and watching the3Dprinter build layer upon layer.

In the nearfuture,prostheticswill be seamlessly integrated into people’s everyday lives with minimal effort. New3Dscanning and body modeling technologies from companies such asBody Labsenable people to3Dscan their limbs and haveprostheticsmodeled after them, making for more natural fitting and appearance.

Technological developments from innovators such as Hugh Herr of MIT have introduced new abilities, includingpropulsion systems, integrated sensors and sophisticated algorithms that work together to automate more natural joint movement. The development ofpredictive movementforprostheticswill make it so people won’t have to think hard about controlling the device. Soon,prostheticswill move with more fluidity to mimic natural movement, and people will be able to control them in part with their brains and bodies through direct natural touch input systems.

Furthermore,3Dprinters are becoming compatible with many new materials, like lightweighttitanium, increasing durability and strength.Prostheticswill also become more comfortable by using multi-material3Dprinting methods to create more natural sockets that better interface with the human body. Imagine if wearing a prosthetic felt like wearing that horribly uncomfortable pair of shoes that now lives in the back of your closet…