Google’s Daydream View VR headset arrives in stores November 10

Google has announced exactly when you’ll be able toget your hands on Daydream View, the new headset it created for Daydream-ready Android phones, including the Pixel and Pixel XL. The View headset will arrive in the Google Store online, and at retailers in the US, Canada, the UK, Germany and Australia on November 10 for $79 US.

Pricing in the other countries varies, but is mostly in line with current exchange rates; retail partners also vary country-to-country, but include Verizon and Best Buy in the US, as well as Best Buy and Carphone Warehouse in Canada and the UK, respectively, along with select carriers.

If you’re not already familiar, Daydream View is a headset created by Google to work with its new Daydream VR platform, which is built into Android Nougat. The View was designed by Google to be easy to set up, convenient to use and comfortable to wear, and is aimed at helping make sure even VR first-timers can jump in and get the most out of the experience.

View ships with a Daydream View controller, which is a simple motion-enabled remote you can use to navigate VR experiences in Daydream. It also includes wrist strap for making sure you don’t lose track of said remote while you’re using VR.

Daydream View works completely wirelessly, automatically detecting when you slide a Pixel or Pixel XL in and switching the device to VR mode. I got the chance to use View briefly at Google’s launch event for the Pixel, and it’s comparable to using something like Samsung Gear VR, and provides a great VR starter experience for those who own aDaydream-compatible smartphone(it’s a very short list right now).

Daydream VR is launching with a number of apps ready to go from the Play Store, including Hulu VR, Google Play Movies (in a virtual theater environment) the Guardian VR and Gunjack 2. We’ll have more in-depth impressions of Daydream in our upcoming review, but if you’re excited about it now, I can safely say that it’s a good way for Pixel owners to dip your toes into VR without much cost.