Mike Lynch, Autonomy Founder and now VC, will appear at Disrupt London

TechCrunch Disrupt Londonis coming! From December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena, you see see incredible speakers and visit the enormous Startup Alley, as well as the famousStartup Battlefieldwhere one startup will take home £30,000. Grab early-bird tickets for Disrupt Londonhere.

We’re excited to announce that we will be joined by the legendaryMike Lynch, the founder of Invoke Capital, a $1 billion fund that invests in European technologies. He holds a PhD from Cambridge in machine intelligence, sits on the prime minister’s Scientific Advisory Panel and is a UK Business Ambassador. Mike has founded a number of companies, including Autonomy, the UK’s largest software company, with a market capitalisation of $11 billion. He has also invested in Darktrace, Luminance, Neurence, Sophia Genetics and Featurespace, as well as advised venture capital and private equity groups.

He is a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Royal Academy of Engineering, and he is an Honorary Fellow of Christ’s College, Cambridge. He is on the advisory board of the Newton Institute, Tech City’s Investment Committee and is a member of the “Create the Change” board at the Francis Crick Institute. He was a non-executive director of Cambridge Enterprise and previous directorships include the BBC, the British Library and Nesta. Finally, he is a council member of the of the Foundation for Science and Technology. We’re happy to have him onstage atDisrupt London.

Extra Early Bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £800 a piece. Or sign up with a co-worker and you can save an additional £100 off each ticket with our multi-ticket (2+) discount. You can get yourtickets at this price until September 23.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

And if you’re interested in pitching your startup for Startup Battlefield, applyhere.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.