Startups will overtake enterprises in the new AI ecosystem

Artificial intelligence pops up as a buzzword every few years, but it has never moved beyond novelty status. This time, though, it is here to stay, andstartupsare poised to drive theAIeconomy forward.

Indeed, we are beginning to see glimpses of it.

NewcomerROSS Intelligence, for example, has gained law firm clients by developing a fully automatedAI“lawyer” capable ofsupporting the legal research needsof large offices. Developed on IBM’s Watson, ROSS is well on its way to becoming a fixture in the legal industry, automating tasks that could take days or weeks for humans to complete.

Popular business messaging appSlack— another startup — is working on incorporatingAIto act as an intelligent personal assistantcapable of talking backand answering questions that have been asked before, saving companies time.

Now is the time forAIto truly take off. So what has changed?

Limited computing power hinderedAIresearch in the past, but our current infrastructure andecosystemcan now support the processing power necessary forAIto “think.” Processing and memory capabilities, cloud computing, fiber-optic high-speed internet access, widespread Wi-Fi and a connected IoT world all combine to create the perfect environment forAIto exist — and have staying power.

Twenty years ago, only enterprise companies with research and development teams could work onAI;even then, most of the work was primarily theoretical. But now, every entrepreneur has access to quick connections, fast devices and the technological infrastructure built by large corporations.

The rise of Facebook and other social media platforms has contributed, as well. Never before have we been able to harvest so much real-time and historical data about how people interact. In the previous millennium, access to this kind of detailed data was unthinkable, much less the idea of it existing largely in the public realm. Because data as a resource is more freely available than ever before, the ability to create anAIecosystemis obtainable by anybody willing to work toward it. The barriers are down.

Like the original internet bubble of the 1990s (or even the current shift to mobile),AIrepresents a disruptivenewlane in which smallstartupscan take the lead and drive innovation.

Enterpriseslike Microsoft, IBM and Alphabet are among the corporations that have been actively working onAIfor some time. The machine-learning applications theseenterpriseshave launched to the public have had varying degrees of success.

Watson’s ability to answer natural-language questions makes itan ideal resourcefor professionals in complicated industries, such as medical and financial. Google’s search has long employed complicated algorithms akin toAI, and parent company Alphabet is already using its research and development toreinvent the web. Even Facebook isheavily investedinAI.

While these giants make mainstream media swoon with theirAIplatforms, it’s indie developers utilizing these platforms, like those at ROSS and Slack, who create the real innovation. According to Bloomberg, more than$300 million was invested inAIstartupsin 2014. By 2020,AIis expected to become a $20 billion business, including cross-platform search, voice assistance and proactive support. Gartner predicts 85 percent of customer interactionswillbemanaged by machines.

When we start seeing the disruptive technology come out of theAIindustry, itwillemerge from the smaller players using the tried-and-true platforms innew, focused ways. But whilestartupswillovertakeenterprisesto capture theAImarket, that doesn’t mean the larger corporations don’t have a role to play.

Theywillact as infrastructure providers, similar to the way cable companies have served as the foundation forstartupsto buildnewand innovative services after the emergence of the internet. Successwillbe with thestartupsthat leverageAItechnology for specific verticals, such as agriculture, manufacturing or insurance.

Startupsmay be able to provide established insurance companies like State Farm, Allstate and Farmers with technology thatwillallow them to become more proactive in their policy planning. Consider anewartificially intelligent insurance underwriter that can better forecast natural disasters and accidents, and adjust premiums.AIaccounting and other financial services are sure to follow, as the technology can be usedto optimize spending.

The predictive decision-making capabilities move beyond just being a cool, novel technology. Even the food supply chain could be managed byAI. Consider thatup to 40 percentof the food in the U.S. is wasted.Startupscould create an end-to-end farming solution withAIpredictions that would be able to move to Africa what used to be waste, for example. Itwillhave a huge impact in terms of how we tackle global hunger and famine issues.

Startupsare already at the cusp of impacting agriculture. Consider theLettuceBot, a startup’sAIcreation that pinpoints weeds. Instead of spraying an entire field with weed killer, the machine identifies weeds and kills them with precision. This not only takes the place of time-consuming manual weeding (reducing overall operation costs), it also increases yield. Farmers using this technology no longer have to over plant to compensate for lettuce lost by weeds, either.

Whether serving as a research assistant supporting a large office, acting as a voice-activated resource in complicated medical procedures or proactively maintaining itself,AIis quickly becoming a reality. Like previous iterations of the internet and computing technology, theAIrevolutionwillrewardnewplayers who learn to use it to their advantage.AIwillplay a role as a fundamental predictive enabler to help us solve large-scale problems, andstartupsare poised to lead the way.