TechCrunch Disrupt London Hackathon is tomorrow, get your tickets and meet our MCs

TheHackathonbegins tomorrow and we are thrilled to announce that Claire Donoghue and Marily Nika will be joining us as MCs. Here’s a little bit more about the dynamic duo who will be running our Hackathon.

Marily has given 3 TEDx talks, she received the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Influence Award in 2015 and a medal of outstanding excellence from Imperial College London for her work in championing the women in tech community. She was the first Greek woman to receive the Google Anita Borg scholarship, she is now the director of the London Geekettes Chapter and is always trying to find new ways to empower women in science both in the UK and globally. She organized the UK’s first women-only hack at Facebook London in 2013 and has participated and judged a total of 20 hacks up to date. The most memorable one being HackEd, sponsored by Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, where her team won the 2nd prize.

Claire has a longstanding passion for machine learning and computer vision!   She is excited by solving real world problems, applying cutting-edge research in these fields.  She was awarded a PhD from Imperial College London.  Her PhD and postdoc research were in medical computer vision and was awarded 10 prizes and additional funding. Claire’s research yielded state of the art software which can interpret medical scans and predict disease severity by learning from thousands of images. She is now working in a commercial environment and continuing to develop machine learning and computer vision algorithms, whilst actively keep up to date with the latest research and academic trends to find new opportunities.

In her free time she has been a great supporter of women in technology; engaging in mentoring schemes and co-founding and leading the London Geekettes with Marily Nika.

We’ve only got a few tickets left from our last release for hackathon participants, so go quick andget registered.

Grab a seat to watch the culmination of all the hard work our hackers put in over the weekend. Today, we’re releasing spectator tickets to watch the presentations of the hack projects on Sunday, 4 December. These are for those who aren’t hacking but want to watch the hacks and winners. You can register for a spectator tickethere.

Cheerio until tomorrow.