Drake’s new short film “Please Forgive Me” arrives as an Apple Music exclusive

Drake’s new short film “Please Forgive Me” launched today ahead of schedule as an Apple Music exclusive. The 23-minute film begins with a plot similar to “Indecent Proposal,” as it involves a wealthy millionaire offering Drake’s girlfriend, played by Belgian model Fanny Neguesha, $1 million to spend the night with him. From there it delves into more of an action flick, as Drake, the girlfriend and Popcaan decide to take off with the cash instead.

Filmed in a week’s time in Soweto township in Johannesburg, South Africa, “Please Forgive Me” was inspired by Drake’s 2016 album, “Views” — a chart-topping release that held the No.1 spot on the Billboard 200 for 12 weeks in a row,reportsRolling Stone. To date, the album has sold more than 1.4 million copies in the U.S.

Two songs from the album are in the film as music videos — “One Dance” and “Controlla.” Other tracks from the album are also featured, like “Weston Road Flows,” “9,” “Views” and “Summer’s Over Interlude.” Plus, the movie includes new music from the rapper’s producer Noah “40” Shebib.

The same music video director, Anthony Mandler — who is behind Drake’s “Over,” “Miss Me” and “Fancy” videos, and who has also directed  Jay Z, Nicki Minaj and Rihanna, among others — is responsible for “Please Forgive Me.”He co-wrote the scriptfor the film, as well, along with Apple Music’s head of content, Larry Jackson.

Originally, the film was expected to debut on Apple Music on September 30, but became available early Monday morning instead.

The explosive visual companion to#VIEWS.@drake’s Please Forgive Me.Only on#AppleMusic:https://t.co/86DnYZFruvpic.twitter.com/ANlLgr2imC

— Apple Music (@AppleMusic)September 26, 2016

“Please Forgive Me” is only going to be available on Apple Music, which is notable not only because of its exclusive status, but also because this is only the second “video” to accompany the music from “Views.” Before today, the only music video from the album is one for “Child’s Play,” but not the other singles. (With the exception of one bonus track, “Hotline Bling,” which Apple Music got a hold of last October.)

The release comes at a time when music streaming services like Apple Music and Spotify are expanding into more video content. Spotify, for example, has beenrolling out originalslike behind-the-scenes documentaries,cartoons, biographies, lo-fi studio recordings and more. Apple Music, meanwhile, acquired the seriesCarpool Karaokeand has beendeveloping a scripted showwith Dr. Dre, among other things.

“Please Forgive Me” is availablehereon Apple Music.