How combined human and computer intelligence will redefine jobs

The man versus machine dichotomy has been a staple of pop culture for decades. From 2001: A Space Odyssey to Blade Runner to Terminator to The Matrix and beyond, film makers have envisioned what the world would look like if artificialintelligencetook over.

However, a new mindset is taking shape — theera of AI-humanhybridintelligence. This combination of ahumanbrain and acomputerintelligenceis known as acentaur. Thecentaurmodel sparked the growth of freestyle chess, a context in whichGarry Kasparov concludedthat “weakhuman+ machine + better process was superior to a strongcomputeralone and, more remarkable, superior to a stronghuman+ machine + inferior process.”

Kasparov’s statement regarding thecentaurmodel is no longer relegated to the world of chess. As AI innovation continues to grow, we should carefully review thecentaurmodel in terms of theworkplaceand consider howcombinedhumanandcomputerintelligencewillredefinejobs.

In 1800, farming accounted fornearly 75 percent of the U.S. labor force. However, the Industrial Revolution introduced a number of inventions that led many to believe there would be massive unemployment rates throughout the country.

The Industrial Revolution resulted in a 25 percent decrease in farming labor by 1890 — but we didn’t see the unemployment that the general public feared.Instead,jobsmoved to factories and eventually white-collarjobslike stockbrokers and business consultants emerged to further stabilize the workforce. Now, as we enter theIntelligenceRevolution, it’s important to realize that technology won’t create historic unemployment rates.Like in the 1800s, technologywillresult in the decline in certain types ofjobs, but new positions that we haven’t even envisionedwillgive people an opportunity to fill in the gaps that machines can’t — seeing the big picture, thinking creatively and connecting seemingly disconnected ideas.Techcrunch eventExhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Exhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Berkeley, CA|June 5BOOK NOWThinking of technology as a means of reshaping theworkplacerather than a means of replacing any and every job, you can see where thecentaurmodel canredefineemployment.Where the centaurmodel fits into the workplaceof tomorrowBeing acentaurin tomorrow’sworkplacemeans combining your ownemotionalintelligencewith the analytical power of AI-enabled technology.Google’s Deep Dream Generatoris a good example of how thiswillwork.The Deep Dream Generator turns vision algorithms inward to display what neural networks see when analyzing an image. Now, Deep Dream is being used tocreate intricate artwork— but it can’t create images from nothing. The Deep Dream Generator relies onhumaninput, a seed from which it can create art.Being acentaurin theworkplacemeans taking advantage of the vast analytical capabilities of AI-enabled technology and addinghumanthinking. The applications for thecentaurmodel in theworkplaceare potentially endless, but here are a few example fields that are well-suited for the combination of deep analysis andhumancreativity:Security and network planning: The volume of cyber attackswillcontinue to grow and AIwillbecomeincreasingly necessary in threat analysis. However, attackerswillalways be creative, launching non-computerized vectors to compromise business networks. This is why humanswillbe necessary to prompt machines toward new ways of keeping creative attackers at bay.Visual arts and music: Collaborationwillreplace the linear nature of artistic creation that we think of today. Two different algorithmic versions of a music program could give ahumanenough content to combine the two and generate an entirely new genre. Or, like Google’s Deep Dream, humans can input seeds of information for machines to generate artistic products.Film and television: There are enough test cases for us to truly understand what a well-framed scene looks like. Teaching a machine how to essentially direct means filmmakers can set up scenes in VR and focus more on storytelling and creative connections than the minute details of production.Architecture and product design: Function over form has dominated each of these fields. However, leaving a machine to design based on function over form might have us living in buildings that are just white boxes. However, IoT sensors can teach machines how we interact with our environments to learn exactly what people need in terms of function, leaving humans to balance function with form — spending more time on the art and less on the details.Software engineering: Development is often thought to be a non-creative discipline, but the best software code is also the most creative. The best developers of tomorrowwilldirect computers on a certain problem, examine the output and continue to redirect machines until they have new ways to solve old problems.It’s easy for a conversation about AI to devolve into a philosophical discussion about consciousness, because that’s what we bring to the table — a sense of consciousness and intuition that machines don’t possess.But there’s no way around it; AI is going toredefinetheworkplace. However, machines are terrible risk takers and have no capacity to make leaps of faith. Rather than thinking about whether or not machineswillrule the world, let’s think about how we can becomeworkplacecentaurs that creativelyredefinethejobsof tomorrow.

The Industrial Revolution resulted in a 25 percent decrease in farming labor by 1890 — but we didn’t see the unemployment that the general public feared.

Instead,jobsmoved to factories and eventually white-collarjobslike stockbrokers and business consultants emerged to further stabilize the workforce. Now, as we enter theIntelligenceRevolution, it’s important to realize that technology won’t create historic unemployment rates.

Like in the 1800s, technologywillresult in the decline in certain types ofjobs, but new positions that we haven’t even envisionedwillgive people an opportunity to fill in the gaps that machines can’t — seeing the big picture, thinking creatively and connecting seemingly disconnected ideas.

Thinking of technology as a means of reshaping theworkplacerather than a means of replacing any and every job, you can see where thecentaurmodel canredefineemployment.

Being acentaurin tomorrow’sworkplacemeans combining your ownemotionalintelligencewith the analytical power of AI-enabled technology.Google’s Deep Dream Generatoris a good example of how thiswillwork.

The Deep Dream Generator turns vision algorithms inward to display what neural networks see when analyzing an image. Now, Deep Dream is being used tocreate intricate artwork— but it can’t create images from nothing. The Deep Dream Generator relies onhumaninput, a seed from which it can create art.

Being acentaurin theworkplacemeans taking advantage of the vast analytical capabilities of AI-enabled technology and addinghumanthinking. The applications for thecentaurmodel in theworkplaceare potentially endless, but here are a few example fields that are well-suited for the combination of deep analysis andhumancreativity:

Film and television: There are enough test cases for us to truly understand what a well-framed scene looks like. Teaching a machine how to essentially direct means filmmakers can set up scenes in VR and focus more on storytelling and creative connections than the minute details of production.

It’s easy for a conversation about AI to devolve into a philosophical discussion about consciousness, because that’s what we bring to the table — a sense of consciousness and intuition that machines don’t possess.

But there’s no way around it; AI is going toredefinetheworkplace. However, machines are terrible risk takers and have no capacity to make leaps of faith. Rather than thinking about whether or not machineswillrule the world, let’s think about how we can becomeworkplacecentaurs that creativelyredefinethejobsof tomorrow.