Just 3 days left to save $1,000 on Disrupt SF tickets

Listen up, would-be TechCrunch Disrupt SF 2016 attendees. Time is quickly running out to get your hands on tickets to the best startup show in the Bay Area at the deeply discounted, early-bird price point of just $1,995 apiece, so get on over to our ticketing page today before prices jump on Saturday, August 13.

Disrupt SF 2016is shaping up to be one of the best Disrupts yet. We’ve got some amazing innovators, entrepreneurs and investors lined up for a series of interviews and fireside chats — folks like Marc Andreessen of Andreessen Horowitz, LinkedIn co-founder and executive chairman Reid Hoffman, and Golden State Warriors guard Steph Curry to name just a few.

In addition to these incredible interviews, Disrupt attendees will get to check out hundreds of new, early-stage startups that will be on display in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, pitching their products and services to the thousands of people wandering the show floor.

Then there’s the Startup Battlefield competition, in which companies will be competing in front of our panel of judges and the broad tech industry with the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup, a $50,000 grand prize and, perhaps most importantly, the attention of the startup community at large.

Plus, attendees will be able to keep the fun and networking going long after the show floor closes with the various after-parties that take place during Disrupt.

Of course, you won’t get to do any of it unless you get a ticket, and the absolute best way to get a ticket and make your wallet a little bit happier in the process is to get your early-bird tickets to Disrupt before the price jumps by $1,000 this weekend. Early-bird tickets are available now through the end of day on Friday, August 12, soget on over to our ticket page todayto get yours.

Disrupt SF 2016 takes place September 12-14 at San Francisco’s Pier 48, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

Oursponsorshelp make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@techcrunch.com.