The startup school of hard knocks with Jason Goldberg at Disrupt London, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6. That’s next week. Grab ticketshere. We’re excited to have serial entrepreneurJason Goldberg, Founder & CEO,Pepo, come to speak about his long experience.

Prior to Pepo Jason founded Hem, Fab, Social Median, and Jobster. Pepo is the place for live conversations: “Create and join conversations that match your interests. Connect with people who are in-the-know. Share your perspective. Learn something new. Get inspired. Follow your passions.” Thousands of people turn to Pepo every day to live in the moment, share interests and gain expertise from people nearby and around the world.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece.You can get your ticketsat this price until 5 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.