Female founders, apply now for Include Office Hours with Accel

Include Office Hours are coming to London! On Friday, December 2 from 4-6 p.m, partners from Accel will join TechCrunch to provide advice and feedback to startups.Apply now!

Unlike previous sessions, the upcoming Office Hours are solely focused on teams with at least one female founder. To sweeten the deal, teams selected for Office Hours will also be invited to an exclusive Women in Tech(Crunch) event, also taking place the evening of December 2nd.

Launched in 2014,Includeis TechCrunch’s diversity program, aimed at facilitating opportunities for underrepresented groups in tech to take their startups to the next level.

Office Hours are part of that effort. Once monthly, TechCrunch collaborates with VC partners to provide feedback and advice to early-stage companies. To be considered for the session with Accel,fill out the application hereby November 25th.

And now, for a little on our co-hosts.

Sonali De Rycker, Partner

Sonali De Rycker focuses on consumer, software and financial services businesses. She led Accel’s investments in Avito (acquired by Naspers), Lyst, Spotify, Wallapop, KupiVIP, Calastone, Catawiki, JobToday, Wonga, Shift Technology and SilverRail. She is also an independent director of Match Group (public). Prior to Accel, Sonali was with Atlas Ventures. Sonali grew up in Mumbai and graduated from Bryn Mawr College and Harvard Business School.

Fred Destin, Partner

Fred Destin focuses on consumer and software investments. He is the lead investor and board member at Deliveroo, Pillpack and Carwow. Prior to Accel, he was a partner at Atlas Venture (now Accomplice) where he worked with companies like Zoopla (public), Secret Escapes, Integral Ad Science, Dailymotion (acquired by Orange), PriceMinister (acquired by Rakuten) and others. Fred grew up in Belgium and graduated from the Solvay Business School (University of Brussels). Find his blog here:https://medium.com/@fdestin.

Luciana Lixandru, Principal

Luciana Lixandru focuses on consumer internet, software and marketplace businesses. She helped lead Accel’s investments and ongoing work in Avito, Catawiki, Wallapop, Deliveroo, Algolia, Doctolib and Vinted, and was previously an investor at Summit Partners. Luciana is from Romania and graduated from Georgetown University.

Andrei Brasoveanu, Associate

Andrei Brasoveanu focuses on software, data and fintech businesses. He helped lead Accel’s investments and ongoing work in Carto, Celonis and JobToday. Prior to Accel, Andrei worked with Foundation Capital and KCG, the largest equities high frequency trading firm in the U.S. Previously, he helped build an algorithmic trading startup on Wall Street focused on commodity futures. Andrei grew up in Romania and graduated from Princeton and Harvard Business School.

If you’re interested in meeting with Accel, applyhereby November 25th!