Announcing the judges for our Berlin Meet Up + Pitch Off this month

It’s July which means TechCrunch’s Berlin Meet Up + Pitch Off is just two weeks away. But don’t worry, there’s still time to bag a ticket to the event — just follow thislink. Tickets cost €10. And yes there will be beer.

We have now assembled our panel of judges who will be casting their expert eyes over the ten(ish) startups that will be taking to the stage to pitch (see below for the line-up).

We’re also looking for volunteers to help behind the scenes on the night. If you’re interested the email address to write to isvolunteer@beta.techcrunch.com.

The Meet Up will take place on July 14 — from 6pm to 10pm — at Berlin’s Glashaus.

Sponsors make TechCrunch events possible. If you want to learn more about sponsorships with TechCrunch, shoot an email tosponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.

Meet the judges…

Tanja Kufneris the Managing Director of Startupbootcamp Smart Transportation & Energy in Berlin since 2014. Prior to joining Startupbootcamp, she was Director of the Wayra Academy in Munich. Tanja has over 20 years experience in the areas of Venture Capital, Management Consulting, and Telecommunications. She has worked in Corporate Venturing, VC and Family Offices since 1998 and earned her MBA from the University of San Francisco. To date, she has invested in 46 Startups, ranging from Seed to Series A.

Videesha Kunkulaguntahas over a decade of work experience in the areas of business/product development, sales, finance and venture capital. Before moving to Berlin she worked as an Associate for London-based Venture Capital fund PROfounders Capital. She has recently been awarded a Digital Policy Fellowship to investigate pressing policy or regulatory issues for the transatlantic digital economy by the German Marshall Fund of the United States a public policy think tank. Formerly she was an Entrepreneur in Residence for FTSE 250 Telco TalkTalk Plc working on strategic innovation and data driven customer relationship management. At the start of her career she worked as a Credit Analyst for Lehman Brothers and transitioned to a generalist Private Banking role with exposure to product and business development at Barclays Wealth in London and Singapore. Beside her work at Redstone Digital she is an avid traveler, design enthusiast and angel investor.

Dr. Christian Nagelis Co-Founder and Partner of Earlybird. Christian has more than 20 years of entrepreneurial and investment experience. He is currently on the boards of Auctionata (Berlin), Bonagora (Berlin), Cashboard (Berlin), LiquidM (San Francisco/Berlin), Number26 (Berlin), Smava (Berlin) and Versus (Berlin). Prior to founding Earlybird in 1997, Christian, together with a group of investors, acquired various companies from the Treuhandanstalt (the former East-German state holding) and gained operational experience. Previously, Christian was a management consultant with McKinsey & Co. Inc. focusing on restructuring, strategy and M & A projects within various industries. He holds a Diplom-Wirtschaftsingenieur degree (Industrial Engineering, MSc equivalent) from the Technical University of Hamburg, specializing in process engineering and a PhD degree in management from the University of St. Gallen.

Ida Tinis the co-founder and CEO of Clue, the world’s fastest growing female health app. She is convinced that technology will profoundly change the future of family planning. Born in Copenhagen, Ida graduated from Denmark’s prestigious creative business school, the KaosPilots. A lifelong entrepreneur, she previously led motorcycle tours around the world and published a book about her experience, “Direktøs” which became a Danish bestseller.

Our partner for the Berlin event is the Tech Open Air conference:

Tech Open Air

Tech Open Air returns to Berlin this summer. Now in its fifth year, TOA takes place over three days with 120+ speakers and 175+ satellite events. A blend of conference and festival, over 7,500 attendees, startups and investors come to connect and learn with industry experts in Europe’s startup capital. Just over a month away, speakers continue to be confirmed daily. For more info, and to get your ticket, head tohttp://toa.berlin.