Only 2 more weeks to save £400 on tickets to Disrupt London

Are you looking to attend the hottest startup show in the UK for the cheapest possible price? You’re in luck. Extra Early Bird tickets toDisrupt London 2016are on sale now through Friday, September 23, giving you just two weeks to get your tickets and save £400 in the process. You can get your ticketshere.

Your extra early-bird ticket gets you into all the events that make Disrupt London the best startup show in Europe. You’ll get to walk the show floor as you chat with the founders and other representatives from dozens of early-stage startups displaying their wares in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley.

Then there’s the Startup Battlefield competition, an event in which a dozen or so promising startups pitch their products and services to our panel of amazing judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup, a £30,000 grand prize, and the attention of the tech community.

And, of course, no Disrupt is complete without the incredible lineup of speakers who will be giving interviews and fireside chats throughout the event. We’re not quite ready to reveal this year’s list of speakers, but prior speakers include the likes of BlaBlaCar CEO Nicolas Brusson, European Commission Vice President Neelie Kroes, and TransferWise CEO Taavet Hinrikus, to name just a few.

Finally, what better way to unwind than by attending the many parties and after-parties that take place throughout the show?

Disrupt London 2016 is shaping up to be one of our best shows yet, but you won’t get to attend without a ticket. You can get your Extra Early Bird ticketshere, and save £400 in the process. Or get the best discount by purchasing 2 or more tickets for a savings of £500 each.

Disrupt London 2016 takes place December 5-6 at London’s Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you there.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.