Reminder: This is the last week to save £400 on Disrupt London tickets

Procrastination is easy, but it can cost you. And if you wait until this weekend to purchase tickets toDisrupt London 2016, it will definitely cost you some hard-earned pounds — 400 of them, to be exact. Friday, September 30 is the final day to score tickets to Disrupt at the extra early bird price point of just £800 each (or £700 each when you buy two) and you can get your Disrupt ticketshere.

At Disrupt London you’ll get to attend a series of lectures and interviews with a truly incredible lineup of entrepreneurs, investors and innovators. We’re not ready to announce this year’s speakers just yet, but past speakers have included the likes of footballer Thierry Henry, Accel Partners General Partner Sonali De Rycker, and retired Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson, to name just a few.

After you’ve taken in the lectures and interviews, you’ll walk the Disrupt show floor as you chat with founders and other representatives of some of the top early-stage startups in the UK and around the world in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley.

Then, you’ll check out the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, where a dozen or so promising early-stage startups pitch our panel of judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup and a £30,000 grand prize.

Finally, after a long day of fun, you’ll unwind in style by attending the after-parties that keep the good Disrupt times going long into the evening after the show floor closes. Of course, you’ll need a ticket to get in, and the best way to get a ticket is to get an extra early bird ticket for just £800 now before the price increases on Saturday.

So, what are you waiting for? Head on over to ourticketing pagetoday to get your cheap Disrupt tickets. Disrupt London 2016 takes place December 5-6 at London’sbeautiful Copper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.