13 TechCrunch stories you don’t want to miss this week

This week, Airbnb sued the city of San Francisco, details about a fatal Tesla autopilot crash came to light and Facebook changed the News Feed again. Here are the top tech stories of the week.

1.Airbnb is taking its beef with the city of San Francisco to court.The company filed suit this weekover a new law that requires Airbnb to verify that its hosts have registered with the city before showing online ads for their homes. The suit aims to block the law from going into effect as scheduled on August 1.

2.The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has opened an investigation intoa recent fatal crash of a Tesla Model Sthat occurred while the company’sAutopilot featurewas activated. Following the news, Mobileye (the company helping power the carmaker’s Autopilot feature) said Tesla’s auto-braking techwasn’t designed for the scenario behind this crash, which involved a laterally crossing vehicle.

3.On the social side of the tech world, Facebook changed the News Feed once again. This time, the News Feed will prioritizefriends above publishers. Still, the best way to improve your News Feed is to teach it. Hide and unfollow what’s boring or annoying. Like something if you actually like it.Twitter added stickers to photo uploads, and they’re actually pretty cool.Google+ turned fivethis week, and is somehow still alive.

4.We learned thatApple is in discussions with Tidal about acquiring its music streaming app, which offers exclusives and early releases from big artists like Beyoncé and Kanye West. If you can’t beat ’em, buy ’em.

5.Kleiner Perkins officially pulled off a $1.4 billion fundraise. The VC giant is definitely not losing its mojo.

6.BuzzFeed got its hands on astock purchase offerarranged by Palantir for its employees. The docs showed that the company asked current and former employees to agree to a host of stipulations. Among them, Palantir asked former employees to renew their non-disclosure agreements, agree not to solicit Palantir employees for 12 months and promise not to sue the company or its executive. It looks to us likePalantir may finally be preparing for an IPO.

7.Spotify and Apple are back at it again. It appears thatApple has rejected Spotify’s latest update to its app, citing business model issues. Shortly before that, Spotify turned off billing within the Spotify iOS app altogether, cutting off free users’ ability to upgrade and even shutting off existing premium mobile users’ payments.

8.Hillary Clinton announced a tech platformat an event in Denver. Almost immediately, the proposal began to generate criticism. The controversial part isn’t the section on encryption, net neutrality or any of the other divisive policy issues that plague the tech industry. Instead, it’s thesection on student debt that’s drawn the strongest critique.

9.TheGoogle-backed undersea cable between the U.S. and Japan went online. The $300 millionFASTER cablebetween Japan and the U.S. West Coast is 9,000 km and can deliver up to 60 Terabits per second (Tbps) of bandwidth.

10.Google introducedProject Bloks, a new hardware platform that teaches kids how to code.

11.On the startup front, a company calledModern Meadow that manufactures livestock-free leather, raised $40 million.

12.It’s no secret in the tech world that Twitter is in trouble. John Mannes speculated about what could happen if larger tech companies bought up the little blue bird. Google, Microsoft, News Corp.?Does anybody want Twitter?

13.CDN network Akamai published an interesting report that concludedthe global average connection speed is up 12 percent from last quarter, to 6.3 Mbps (a 23 percent increase year over year). Who’s in the lead for fastest connection speed? South Korea.