This is the last week to get discounted tickets to Disrupt London

Okay you’ve been excellent at procrastinating so far, but the time to act is now. This is the last week to get your discounted early-bird tickets toDisrupt London 2016for just £950 apiece, a full £250 less than they’ll be at the door once the show floor opens on Monday, December 5.

Seriously. No more extensions. No more exceptions. Just £250 less in your pocket if you wait until Monday. So drop what you’re doing right now (like, now now) and head overto our ticketing pageto get your tickets to the best startup show in London.

That ticket is your all-access pass to everything that makes Disrupt great. With it, you will get to connect with hundreds of early-stage startups displaying their wares in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, and check out the few dozen promising companies in the Startup Battlefield competition.

Startups participating in the Battlefield are vying for $50,000 (about £40,600), the coveted Disrupt Cup and, perhaps more importantly, the attention of the tech community at large.

You’ll also get to learn from some top-notch innovators, investors and entrepreneurs in the series of lectures and interviews that we have lined up throughout the course of the three-day event. People like TransferWise co-founder and CEO Taavet Hinrikus, Index Ventures partner Saul Klein, and Russian model, philanthropist and occasional film actress Natalia Mikhailovna Vodianova, to name but a few.

Finally, after a long day of perusing, learning, and networking, what better way to unwind than by attending the after-parties that keep the good times going long after the show floor has closed up for the day?

Of course, to do any of this, you’re going to need a ticket, and the best way to get into Disrupt is by getting your Disrupt tickets at our early-bird price points, so save yourselves the headache and the £250 and get your tickets today.

You can get themhere. Your wallet will thank you.

Disrupt London takes place December 5-6 at London’s beautiful Copper Box Arena. We can’t wait to see all of you fine folks there next week weeks.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.