Join Kaifu Lee and other top speakers at TechCrunch Beijing next week, November 7-8

TechCrunch is excited to return to Beijing next week to hostour latest event on Chinese soilwith some top, top guests in tow.

The event takes place 7-8 November at the Beijing Institute of Fashion Technologywith legendary investor Kaifu Lee, founder of Sinovation Ventures and former head of Google China, among the all-star cast on show.

Other prominent speakers taking part include Xiangdong Zhang, co-founder and CEO of red-hot smart bike startup700Bike, and Joe Xia, co-founder and CTO of bike-sharing startupMobike, as well as Colin Angle, co-founder ofiRobot, and the CEO of Microsoft Accelerator Greater China, Bin Luo. They will be joined by representatives fromSmartisan,Ehang,Indiegogo,LeEco,Sequoia China,GGVand more — singerDadawaand Chinese national soccer captain Yunlong Xu will provide a sprinkling of celebrity, too.

Beyond on-stage one-on-one interviews, there will be panel sessions covering tech topics as diverse as artificial intelligence, biotech, the globalization of hardware companies, China’s live-streaming apps, the promise of Southeast Asia, and virtual reality.

Startups are, of course, a critical component to any TechCrunch event, and they will be front and center of proceedings at TechCrunch Beijing 2016.

The event itself will house a startup alley, where over 150 companies will exhibit their companies and product, while the final day of the show will feature thepitch competition. That will see 15 selected finalists compete for a shot at the top prize of 2 million RMB ($295,000), kindly sponsored by VC firm Gobi Ventures.

That all comes after the weekend hackathon, however. Running 5-6 November, the hackathon kickstarts the proceedings with a showcase of talent from Beijing, China and beyond. It isn’t too late to register for the hackathon,head over here to do that right now.

Founders will also be interested to know that this year’s event will again include our VC Meet-Up sessions, which allow you to book time to pitch your company to an investor.You can find more details about that right here.

Our China-based events attract upwards of 5,000 attendees, so don’t miss your chance to join them —get your ticket now!

We look forward to seeing you in Beijing next week!

We’ve proudly hosted the TechCrunch conference five times since our first event in Shanghai 2013. Over 25,000 people have attended our events in Shanghai and Beijing, and more than 300 heavyweight speakers shared their insights with the audience.

Over 700 startups have exhibited, and more than 2,000 early-stage companies have enjoyed one-on-one time with leading investors during the VC meet-up segment.