Watch Microsoft Accelerator’s Bangalore Demo Day here

TechCrunch is pleased to bring you Microsoft Accelerator’s Bangalore Demo Day today, Wednesday June 22nd starting at 9:30pm PT.

The Microsoft Accelerator is an immersive three- to six-month program aimed at helping entrepreneurs get through the challenges of building a company, finding customers and scaling to global markets. There are seven accelerators located around the world, from Seattle to Beijing, from Berlin to Tel-Aviv. Programs have a focus on enterprise startups; this Think Next in Bangalore showcases late stage startups with traction in various verticals including retail, ecommerce and healthcare.

Investors and press will hear pitches from ten companies solving problems ranging from parenting tips to blood transfusions. Mark your calendars, grab some caffeine and watch it live right here.

[youtube=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7a3dFZ7eTOM&w=640&h=390]

Admission Table– Imagine a single place for everything to study overseas – university short listing, admission counseling, scholarships and financing, and tutoring for SAT/ GRE/ GMAT/ TOEFL/ IELTS – all on your mobile in real-time.

Altizon– Altizon is the world’s first Industrial Internet Platform Company focused on making Enterprises IoT (Internet of Things) ready.

Ameyo– Easy-to-use, cloud-based call center software that helps improve customer interactions across multiple channels.

Aureus Analytics– Aureus Analytics provides platform and products to bring the power of big data analytics at the point of decision for Insurance and Banking.

Baby Chakra– BabyChakra is the fastest growing online platform that connects expecting mothers and new parents to services and products that makes parenting a less tedious affair.

Calm.io– Calm.io is a DevOps platform for orchestrating cloud operations comprising of containers, micro services and virtual machines in cloud-native, on-premise and hybrid deployment environments.

Distiman– Distiman allows Mom and Pop retailers in India to double their profit with just-in-time procurement, right from their smartphones. Distiman canopies more than 160 brands and nearly a million retailers. The company is profitable with more than $1 million.

Locus– Locus is a state-of-the-art delivery automation platform which uses advanced algorithms to automate logistics of an on-demand business and provide better end-customer experience. It offers proprietary route deviation engine, order dispatch automation, field user app, route optimization, end customer tracking, and predictive analytics.

Resulticks– Global service provider of omnichannel solutions for marketing, customer acquisition, and customer loyalty.

Reverie– Reverie, as a service platform, encompasses technologies for delivering multilingual content to users across devices and includes intelligent transliteration & localization APIs along with local language keypad.

Strides– Strides enables safe, better quality, and high availability of blood components. Their product ‘Safetrans’ facilitates blood transfusion rules to support good transfusion practices, tracks, and records. It also acts on each step of the blood transfusion process – right from the donor selection to the blood component being transfused into the patient.

Yellow Messenger– Yellow Messenger is a one-stop mobile app with an Artificial Intelligence-powered chat interface to discover, enquire, and shop from millions of brands and stores both off and online. It enables users to shop lifestyle products and electronics, book travel packages, make mobile recharges and bill payments, order from neighboring grocery stores, book home services, make restaurant reservations, and order food over a simple chat interface.