The OX is a flat-pack truck for the developing world

The Global Vehicle Trust has revealed its OX prototype, a truck that can be flat-packed into itself for transportation anywhere in the world. When it arrives at its destination, the OX can be unpacked and assembled by a trained team of three professionals in about 12 hours. (Insert your own favorite IKEA joke here.)

The GVT was founded five years ago by British businessman and philanthropist Torquil Norman with the purpose of developing cost-effective transportation. He brought Gordon Murray on board, the man behind McLaren road cars, with the following brief: the vehicle has to have high ground clearance and generous approach and departure angles; its layout has to be configurable for multiple uses; and the cab has to fit three people.

And voila: OX. The version we’re seeing now is the XP3 prototype, which has received interest from aid agencies and Norman’s contacts in Africa. The GVT is raising money now to further fund the project to its completion.

The OX can be packed six to a shipping crate in its flat-pack form. Once assembled, the rear space can hold up to 10 people or eight 44-gallon drums. The front cab does indeed seat three, with the driver in the center so the vehicle can be used in countries that drive on the left or right side of the road.

Even assembled, the OX is a bit of a transformer. The bases of the rear bench seats can be removed and placed under the wheels for traction in sandy terrain. The tailgate slides off and can be turned lengthwise to be used as a loading ramp. The OX’s dry weight is a substantial 1,600 kg (3,527 lbs), and it can haul a payload up to 1,900 kg (4,188 lbs) with its 2.2-liter diesel engine. The two-wheel-drive vehicle has been engineered to perform as well as a four-wheel-drive vehicle, an important consideration in areas where roads are not maintained or are nonexistent.

The goal now is to make the OX a reality. As Norman said in a press release:

“Our priority now is to raise the funding to complete the testing and take the project to fruition. We believe that the OX has huge potential for charities, aid organisations and development programmes. My dream is to one day see an OX in every village in Africa.”