Everything that happened at Disrupt London 2016

The doors to TechCrunch Disrupt London 2016 opened December 5 at the Copper Box Arena in London. The two-day conference hosted more than 2,300 attendees, with hundreds of thousands more tuning in online. You can also watch the full panels from Disrupt London onYouTube, and catch select segments onFacebook.

During Startup Battlefield, 12 companies plus one audience choice company pitched to a panel of judges in hopes of winning the Disrupt Cup and the €40,000 Grand Prize. TechCrunch editors pored over the judges’ notes and narrowed the list down tofive finalists:

Seenit took home the grand prizefor its user-generated content aggregation app. The idea is that businesses or event organizers can assign video shots to fans, and then aggregate that content for promotional videos or memories. You can watch their pitch in the video above. InsideDNA, the company that looks deep into DNA to find the best drug targets for your body,was the runner-up.

Before the conference kicked off, hackers stayed up all night to create apps, sites and hardware in the Disrupt Hackathon. Each group had one minute to present to a panel of judges onstage. Thetop prize went to The Emotion Journal, a hack that used IBM Watson to create a smart voice journal. You talk to it about your day and it analyzes your emotions and stores the logs. If you do it once a day you can see a visual representation of your feelings and experiences over time. We also sawfive awesome Marauder-Map inspired games and messaging hacksduring this year’s presentations.

The first runner-up was Sayfe Space, a company that gives refugees a platform to naturally describe their problems and get support by anonymously chatting with volunteers who can empathize and offer support. The team used IBM Watson for natural language processing and the chatbot interactions. Doshbot, an AI assistant that helps you save money, was the second runner-up. It integrates and pulls in your banking transactions and GPS location and mixes them with your emotional tones and writing style on social networks, such as Twitter and Facebook.

Day 1

On Day 1 of the conference, we heard from speakers like Mustafa Suleyman of Google DeepMind, saw an on-stage demo from Marc Raibert of Boston Dynamics and watched Volkswagen launch a new mobility company. Here’s the full rundown:

Day 2

The second day of Disrupt London featured a demo from Samantha Payne of Open Bionics, an interview with Azmat Yusuf from Citymapper and more. Here’s the full rundown:

Thanks to everyone who came to Disrupt London; we hope to see you back next year and at Disrupt New York and San Francisco in 2017. You can find more photos from the event on ourFlickr feed, andcheck out more of our events and Meetups here.