Clinton campaign to hold fundraiser at Black Hat hacker conference this week

Cybersecurity issues have plagued Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign for months, from her long-running email controversy to the recent hacks of the Democratic National Committee and the campaign itself. But cybersecurity experts appear to be embracing Clinton’s campaign — a fundraiser will be held for the campaign during Black Hat, a hacker conference taking place this week in Las Vegas.

The event will feature Jeff Moss, the founder of the Black Hat and DEF CON security conferences, Jake Braun, a former security consultant for the Department of Homeland Security, and Michael Sulmeyer, the coordinator of the Clinton campaign’s Cybersecurity Working Group, according toClinton’s website. The trio is slated to discuss “cyber policy issues” facing the next president, and tickets will run from $100 to $2,700.

The fundraiser comes just a few days afterClinton’s campaign was reportedly hacked. A Clinton campaign spokesperson told TechCrunch that an analytics data program used by the campaign was breached during the DNC hack, but outside security experts had not discovered any breach of the campaign’s internal systems.

Clinton’s campaign often hosts themed fundraisers (past tech themes have included national security and women in tech), but the focus on cybersecurity is a first for a campaign fundraiser. “This event was organized by supporters without any involvement from the campaign,” a campaign official told TechCrunch.

Clinton herself is not scheduled to attend the Black Hat event and will instead befundraising with tech leaderslater this week in San Francisco, accompanied by campaign chair John Podesta and formerGleeactor Darren Criss. The San Francisco event is hosted byfor45, a Clinton fundraising group focused on millennial voters.

The Black Hat fundraiser is scheduled for Wednesday evening. After the first hour, the event will be open to all Black Hat attendees,Salted Hashreports.