No, really, the headphone jack is more useful than you think!

Appletoday announced that the newest generation iPhonewill do away with the ubiquitous headphone jack, apparently to make the phone waterproof and to make space for the haptic feedback engine for the home button. Obviously sad news if you just bought an expensive new pair of headphones, but the interface is used for a lot more than just pumping phat beats down your ear tunnels.

From filmmakers to concerned parents, there’s a rich ecosystem of “appcessories” that use the headphone port for two-way communication.

Removing the headphone jack from a phone is problematic; the most obvious reasons have been discussed to death —most succinctly summarized by Owen Williams over on Medium. TL;DR: Bluetooth is a pain, 3.5mm jacksjust work.

The humble headphone jack socket has a tremendous advantage over Micro USB, USB-C, Apple’s 15-pin and Lightning adapter and the host of other connectors that have been used on cell phones over the years. It is there, no matter if you’re using Windows Phone, Android, BlackBerry or iOS.

It also sports a surprisingly robust three-channel communication interface: One channel in (for the microphone) and two channels out (for the left and right stereo channel). What not a lot of people realize is that the headphone socket also supplies a tiny amount of power. Not a lot, but the microphone that’s embedded into your innocuous-looking earbuds does need alittlebit of power, which can beharvested(pdf) to power, say, a microprocessor in an accessory.

Now take a world of hackers, tinkerers and creative technicians and give them a three-channel interface plus low voltage. What do you get? A rich ecosystem of fantastic little accessories.

Imagine for a fleeting moment that you are a third-party accessory manufacturer. Are you going to apply for anMade For iOS (MFi) licenseand paya $4 royalty feeto Apple for every device you sell, and still need to develop a second version of your product for Android users? Or are you going to use the one socket that is available on all devices you are targeting? For large manufacturers creating millions of units of whatever product they are peddling, it doesn’t matter; they’re more than happy to design several different versions and they even begrudgingly pay the licensing fee to Apple. Smaller, independent companies don’t have that luxury.

Hell, it isn’t even just the small companies that have embraced the simplicity of having a single socket available on all smartphones out there.Square, the company that made it possible for thousands of small businesses to make charges by credit card, is still sending out free magstripe readers to get its customers onboarded onto its service quickly.

Apple is frequently highlighting how good its cameras are, most recently withyet another huge Shot on iPhone billboard campaign. It is no surprise, then, that filmmakers are embracing the platform for creating movies.

For filmmakers, it turns out that the camera on modern iPhones is plenty good for shooting  — at leastone Hollywood filmhas been shot exclusively on iPhones. The cameras on the devices are undeniably great, but audio is another matter. For film, you can always use an external sound recorder. The increasingly popular live streaming is quite a different barrel of fish: you need an external microphone.

Products likeMicW’s $200 iShotgun,RØDE’s $80 SmartLavandTASCAM’s $35 TM-ST1all rely on the 3.5mm socket on your device, which means they can be used on all phones and most cameras. Of course, microphone companies have also created Lighting accessories for audio recording, but if a filmmaker is going tosplurge $500 on a Sennheiser microphone, they’ll probably want a 3.5mm jack so it can be used with other cameras than just the iPhone.

Plugging fancier microphones into a microphone socket doesn’t seem very revolutionary? Okay, let’s take a look at some of the more exotic uses of the headphone socket.

The iPhone has a lot of sensors built in, but temperature isn’t one of them, so there are a few companies that have created external thermometers.Thermodo’s solutionis a perfect example. It started its life witha $330,000 Kickstarter campaign, creating a spectacularly elegant little device for measuring how close you’re going to get to freezing to death on your camping trip.

“I understand why Apple is doing this,” says Thermodo’s CEO and founder, Willi Wu, commenting about how a lack of headphone sockets is going to be problematic. “It’s too bad the consumer gets stuck in the middle. They won’t be able to use their existing headphones and accessories like Thermodo. Apple has now removed the only open standard port available, forcing companies to use their proprietary and royalty based Lightning connector. It would be impossible to make Thermodo as small as it is using the Lightning connector.”

More advanced measuring devices are available, too, includingHMB’s eSmogMeterthat measures electric fields. There are even fully functionaloscilloscopeandmultimeterappcessories that plug into the headphone socket.

WithBevel, you can use your phone to make 3D scans of the real world.iBlazrbrightens your smartphone photos.WeatherPointclaims to be the world’s smallest weather station.FloJackadds NFC reading to your iPhone.Lumuhelps your phone pose as a light meter.Pluggy Lockuses the headphone socket to tether your phone semi-securely in place.MyLEDadds aBlink(1)-likeLED to your phone to enable new types of notifications. The FDA-approvedKinsa’s smart thermometermeasures your body temperature. Yuan Yang, a researcher at the University of Berkeley demoeda device that can help practitioners of Chinese Medicine diagnose their patients(pdf).

There’s a tremendously broad array of app-empowered accessories out there that have one thing in common: connecting apps to the outside world via a headphone socket.

I understand how, from Apple’s point of view, locking down its ecosystem even harder than it has been before, the company can make more money. It might even make the argument that building a higher walled garden equals higher security and reliability for its customers. In the process, the company has left behindthe crazy ones, the misfits, the rebels and the troublemakers.

The point is that by removing the headphone socket and effectively blocking things likeProject HiJack, which with easy-to-buy $80off-the-shelf development kitsmakes hardware and app hacking easy and accessible, Apple reaffirms that it is fond of rules. Especially its own. It continues to make it harder for indie companies to hack their way to a more interesting future, without having to go through Apple’s borderline draconian MFi approval process. Just curious and want to learn? You’re explicitly out of luck — inits MFi FAQ, Apple tells students and hobbyists that they’re not welcome.

Where Apple goes, other phone manufacturers follow. The tinkerers, hackers and startups of the world will carry the brunt of this decision and I, for one, will grieve the loss.