Here’s why you should attend the Disrupt London Hackathon, more tickets now available

The Hackathon atDisrupt London 2016is so close we can almost taste it. Soon, thousands of founders, investors and tech enthusiasts will storm London’s Copper Box Arena for the best startup show in Europe. Today, we’re thrilled to announce that the next wave of tickets to the hackathon is available now, and you canget your free hackathon ticket here.

The hackathon kicks off at 12:30 p.m. PT on Saturday, December 3, with networking and the forming of hackathon teams. On Sunday, after a grueling 20 or more hours of hacking and coding, teams will have just 60 seconds to present their projects to a panel of judges on the Disrupt stage.

So, why should you join us at the Hackathon, you ask?

Simply put, there’s no better way to take that great idea you have swirling around in the back of your head to the next level than by finding a couple of other hard-working folks and spending almost a full day working on it.

Even if you don’t have that billion-dollar idea, you could team up with someone who might, and get in on the ground level. Plus, even if you don’t, you’ll be spending the weekend making connections with folks who are passionate about the startup community.

There are also all sorts of prizes up for grabs. In addition to building something awesome, Hackathon teams have a chance to win tickets to the main Disrupt conference, a $5,000 (about £4,000) grand prize, and several toys, gadgets and monetary prizes from our wonderful Hackathon sponsors.

Each team that achieves a score of 3 or higher from our panel of judges will win two free tickets to Disrupt, which takes place December 5-6 at the same location. While at Disrupt, you’ll get to watch companies compete in the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, chat with founders of hundreds of startups in Startup and Hardware Alley, and hear from some of the more brilliant minds in the business with the many interviews and lectures that take place throughout the show.

Plus, you’ll get to attend the parties and after-parties that will let you keep the good times and networking going long into the night after the show floor closes.

The current wave of tickets to the Hackathon at Disrupt London will be doled out on a first-come, first-served basis, so don’t delay in getting over to ourticketing pageto get your tickets before they run out.

The Hackathon is perfect for both hardware and software projects, so bring whatever great ideas you have and spend a fantastic weekend bringing it that much closer to reality. We can’t wait to see what you all come up with.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.