Only two days left to save big on Disrupt London tickets

Pay attention, European startup fans.TechCrunch Disrupt London 2016is fast approaching, and soon thousands of entrepreneurs, investors and tech enthusiasts will make their way to London’s Copper Box Arena for the show.

If you want to be among them, you have just two days left to score deeply discounted, extra early-bird tickets to Disrupt, and you can get your tickets for just £800 apiecehere. That’s a full £400 off the final retail price of £1,200. But you only have until Friday, September 23 to get these extra early-bird tickets before the prices increase.

With that ticket, you’ll get to attend a series of interviews and lectures with a truly incredible lineup of entrepreneurs, investors and innovators. We’re not ready to announce this year’s speakers just yet, but past speakers have included the likes of footballer Thierry Henry, Passion Capital Partner Eileen Burbidge, and retired Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson, to name just a few.

You’ll also get to chat with startup founders and other representatives from some of the most promising early-stage startups in the UK and around the world in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley. Plus, you can check out the illustrious Startup Battlefield competition, where a few dozen startups pitch our panel of judges in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup and a £30,000 grand prize.

Finally, after a long day of fun, you’ll get to unwind by attending the after-parties to keep the fun going long into the evening.

Of course, you’ll need a ticket to partake in all the fun that is Disrupt London, and the best way to get a ticket is to get an extra early bird ticket and save £400 in the process. So be sure to get your tickets today.

Disrupt London 2016 takes place December 5-6 at London’sCopper Box Arena, and we can’t wait to see you all there.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.