What is Workplace by Facebook? Director Julien Codorniou to tell all at Disrupt, Dec 5-6

TechCrunch Disrupt in Londonis on December 5-6! And counting! Grab ticketshere. Many speakers have already been announced, but they just keep coming! Next up is Julien Codorniou Director of ‘Workplace by Facebook’ (what we used to notionally call ‘Facebook at Work’).

Julien serves as Director and global head of Workplace by Facebook, managing all things sales, customer success and partnerships for this initiative, built out of London. He joined Facebook in 2011 to manage the gaming team in EMEA and was recently leading the global Platform Partnerships team, helping Facebook partners to build, grow and monetize their apps with Platform. Before Facebook he was the director of business development at Microsoft Corp where he launched the BizSpark program.

Since 2012, he’s served on the board of the French media group Le Monde. He’s also the co-author of the book: “The Kelkoo.com success story“, published by Pearson in 2005.

The two-day Disrupt conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000. You can buy early-birdtickets for Disrupt London here.

You want to display your company? Then go for a booth in the Startup Alley. For startups there is also the brand newCrunchMatchprogram where we match startups to investors. Check it all outhere.

Extra early bird tickets are now available to purchase for the discounted price of just £950 a piece. You canget your tickets at this priceuntil 4 December.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrolment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.