Virtual and augmented reality need a PG-13 moment

We’ve passed a significant milestone in consumer adoption ofvirtualrealityand augmentedreality — althoughit’s clear thatwe’re a few models awayfrom atruly refinedVR/AR experience.

However, withVRandARpoised to become a mainstream force, it’s the opportune time to think about how kids will interact with these technologies. Kids, of course,naturally adopt technologyand love video games, which is one of the core use cases ofVRandAR.

While clear progress on the path toVRandAR’s culture-altering potential in entertainment and education is truly exciting, where kids are concerned, new technology faces the very real pitfall of parental backlash. Every new cultural shift, from the jitterbug and movies to the iPhone and social media, is accused of destroying our youth.

The 1984 filmIndiana Jones and the Temple of Doomcreated such a massive rolling boulder of parental outrage that the Motion Picture Association of America, which rates movies in the U.S.,responded by creating thePG–13rating.VRandARare new and unique in their ability to immerse users, so with parents still grappling withquestions about 2D screen time impacting the health and development of their kids, it’s only a matter of time beforeVRandARare thrown under the boulder.

In spite of concerns about appropriate content and screen time, no one can dispute the fact thatVRandAR’s potential holds clear, legitimate benefits for kids. However, that potential will only reach maturity if the industry acts now to head off parental backlash. Both innovation and funding in such a young industry would surely suffer from the chilling effect of mom and dad’s cold shoulder. But, quick and thoughtful action by industry players would provide insulation and allow the still nascent technologies to continue pushing the bleeding edge of technology while not bleeding out.

Anyone who has endured the mind-numbing drone of rote learning can understand the allure ofVRandARas educational tools. Their immersive and engaging nature makes them exciting andpowerful educational tools. Teachers working to inspire enthusiasm and a love of learning in students understand the appeal of the experience and areincreasingly using them in classrooms. The opportunities are mind-expanding. Math, science, history, art, literature —VRandARcan turn static or abstract learning into dynamic, interactive, immersive experiences.

For example, aVRproject called“World of Comenius”in the Czech Republic enabled students to play around with atoms and get a “feel” for their behavior. Or take the startupNearpod, which launched the firstVRfield trip earlier this year, and gives students the opportunity to explore the world without leaving their classroom.

This immersion empowers kids to gain a stronger grasp over what they learn and provides a safe place for them to explore and experiment.VRandARalso opens up new ways to collaborate andcultivate empathy in students, as well as to accommodate students with different learning styles.

Using technology encourages them todevelop skills they will inevitablyneedin the digital future, andresearch shows that blended learning is good.It promotes autonomy and independence, empowering kids to pursue the learning tracks that most interest them and figure things out on their own.

As exciting as all this is, the upshot is that we’re still in the very early stages ofVRandAR,and their most compelling uses are yet to come. However, the potential that they promise is predicated on a healthy industry that can encourage and support innovation and experimentation.

Taking action to insulateVRandARfrom backlash offers safe harbor, but it may also create opportunities by courting a key market. More than 30 years afterTemple of Doom, thePG-13rating is one of the most sought after and profitable. Not only did the MPAA’s decision provide parents with an effective way to address their concerns, but it also created a new storytelling niche that grew into a profit center.

Now is the time forVRandARto grab itsPG-13moment.

Protecting innovation and cultivating a key market should start by taking a cue from themovie, television and console game industries and self-regulating. Concerns about age-appropriate content are easily addressed by a rating system, and concerns about screen time are as simple as providing controls like those parents use to control TV and iPad time. Allowing parents to input a code and set the amount of time their children are allowed to useVRandARplatforms will go a long way to putting parents at ease about how long their kids are using this new technology.

Taken together, the steps outlined above will create goodwill in the market by acknowledging and embracing parents’ role regulating their children’s use of technology. It may even speed the uptake of educationalVRandARby clearly designating products designed to that market’s sensibilities.

Do you think it’s time forVRandARto self-regulate? What should that look like?