Harry Weller, a “Midas List” VC and the head of NEA’s East Coast practice, has passed away

Harry Weller, who has long led the East Coast venture practice ofNew Enterprise Associatesfrom Washington, D.C., passed away unexpectedly last night. He was 46.

Weller had joined the firm in 2002, not long after nabbing an undergraduate degree in physics from Duke University and an MBA from Harvard.

Neither his family nor NEA has released details of what happened; NEA just issued the following statement, however:

We are deeply saddened to share that our partner and great friend Harry Weller passed away in his sleep on Saturday, Nov. 19.

A renowned technology investor, champion of innovation and true partner to entrepreneurs, many knew Harry to be bold, brilliant, and passionate. To those who knew him best, he was equally remarkable for his kind heart and generous spirit. Harry was a deeply devoted father, husband and friend.

We are deeply grateful to the many friends and colleagues who have reached out to express condolences and offer support. During a time of immeasurable grief, there is comfort in knowing how much he was loved, and that his tremendous impact will be felt for many, many years to come. His is a legacy to which we can all aspire.

Weller was recognized earlier this year by Forbes, which included Weller on its “Midas List” for the ninth year in row. (DCInno noted that Weller was theonly VC in Washingtonto make the list, which also included well-known Silicon Valley VCs Marc Andreessen, Jim Goetz, and Bill Gurley.)

Known for his quick smile and relaxed demeanor, Weller’s track record of success as a VC was long and included the marketing software company Eloqua, acquired Oracle in an$810 milliondeal in 2012; the event software company Cvent, whichwent publicin 2013 wasacquiredearlier this year by the private equity firm Vista Equity; and the deals site Groupon, whose Series A round NEA led back in 2008; the companywent publicin 2011.

According to his profile page on NEA, Weller’s greatest loves have long included his “crazy kids,” his “cool wife,” music, the Navy (where he served as a pilot before launching his business career), and surfing.

NEA also credits Weller for cofounding the firm’s 13-year-old China organization.