Early-bird ticket sales to Disrupt London end December 5

Are you planning on heading to the UK forDisrupt Londonnext week? If so, you might as well save a few hundred quid in the process by getting early-bird tickets for just £950 apiece, a full £250 less than they’ll be if you wait to buy them at the door.

You can get your early bird ticketshere. Your wallet will thank you.

That ticket gets you an all-access pass to everything that makes TechCrunch Disrupt great. At Disrupt, you can check out all the hot startups competing in theStartup Battlefieldcompetition in the hopes of winning the coveted Disrupt Cup, the $50,000 (about £40,000) grand prize and, perhaps most importantly, the attention of the tech community at large.

In addition to the Battlefield, you’ll get to hear from ouramazing lineup of entrepreneurs, investors and innovatorswho will share their wisdom with the community in the lectures and interviews we have scheduled. Folks like Felix Capital Founder and Managing Partner Frederic Court, Accompany Founder and CEO Amy Chang, Facebook at Work Director Julien Codorniou, BenevolentBio CEO and Professor Jackie Hunter, Connect Ventures managing partner Sitar Teli, and Russian model, philanthropist and film actress Natalia Vodianova.

You can check out the full agendahere.

Plus, you’ll get to check out the dozens of companies on display each day in Startup Alley and Hardware Alley, and chat with company founders and other tech lovers perusing the show floor. With all the parties and afterparties on the Disrupt calendar, you can keep that networking going long into the night.

But you can’t do any of it if you don’t have a ticket, and the best way to get a ticket is to get an early-bird ticket now before the price jumps by £250 at the door. You can get your early-bird tickets to Disrupt London 2016here.

Disrupt takes place December 5-6 at London’s beautiful Copper Box Arena, and we definitely can’t wait to see you all there soon!

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.