‘Rogue One’ transports viewers to a bigger Star Wars universe

For months, I insisted that I wasn’t going to seeRogue One.

I was kind of a whiner about it: Yes, I did seeThe Force Awakens,and yes, I mostly liked it, but I kept telling friends that I didn’t need to buy a ticket to a newStar Warsmovie every year for the rest of my life. I repeated that speech right up until I found out thata certain TechCrunch editorhad overlooked his invite to a press screening.

So last night, despite my protests, I found myself watching anotherStar Warsmovie. Even then, I told myself it was for journalism’s sake. I maintained the lie for as long as I could, but by the time I walked out, I had to admit that I lovedRogue One— more thanForce Awakens, more than anyStar Warsfilm sinceThe Empire Strikes Back.

To be clear, it has its share of problems. The characters are drawn in such broad strokes that I imagine the final script was littered with Post-it notes reading FILL IN CHARACTER ARC HERE. It’s only thanks to the heavy lifting of the actors that our heroes feel like more than a generic band of ragtag rebels. (Hey, that was true in the original trilogy, too.)

But despite the underdeveloped characters, this is an exciting start to Disney’s “anthology” films, which will explore stories outside the mainStar Warsnarrative.Rogue Onein particular focuses on how the Rebel Alliance gets its hands on the plans for the Death Star — the same Death Star plans that Princess Leia is fleeing with in the very first shot of the very first film.

Now, that might not sound terribly promising: Was anyone really demanding to know who stole the Death Star plans and why? The premise sounds particularly worrying since this is a franchise with a record of filling in its back story inthe most disappointing way…

But it turns out thatRogue One‘s setup is exactly what was needed — it allows director Gareth Edwards and writers Chris Weitz and Tony Gilroy (working from a story by John Knoll and Gary Whitta) to tell a very different kind ofStar Warsstory.

Think about seeingA New Hopefor the first time. Think, in particular, aboutthe Mos Eisley cantinawith its seemingly endless variety of aliens. Even more thanthe justly famous shot of Luke Skywalker framed against the two suns of Tattooine,that‘s the moment when the movie convinces you — as no science fiction movie had before — that there’s a biggerStar Warsuniverse beyond the edges of the screen.

In Mos Eisley, you could almost believe that every single creature at that bar had an interesting story to tell. The subsequent films are also stuffed with cool aliens, spaceships and other hints at that broader world — a world further fleshed out in the gone-but-not-forgottenexpanded universeof novels, comics and video games. (There’s evena book about Mos Eisley.)

But the actual plots of Episodes I through VII suggest that there’s only one story thatreallymatters, namely the grand battle between Jedi and Sith, Rebels and Empire — and only a handful of characters who really matter to that struggle. Everyone else is a bit player.

Maybe it’s a personal thing, but this has always felt a little unsatisfying to me, as far as space opera fantasies go. Thankfully,Rogue Oneisn’t about that grand narrative. It’s not about someone discovering that they’re the Chosen One destined to bring down an evil empire. Instead, it’s about people who are barely more than a footnote in the bigger story.

This seems to free Edwards and his writers in a number of ways. For one, there’s a surprising grimness to the plot. You might not think that this kind of fatalism belongs in aStar Warsmovie, but if anything, it makesRogue Onefeel more grandly heroic than its predecessors. The rebels really don’t know if they’re going to succeed — and even if they do win, they know victory will come at great cost.

Rogue Onedoesn’t look like otherStar Warsmovies, either. It’s certainly full of visual nods toA New Hope,but Edwards has also talked about his desire to createa gritty war movie, which turns out to be surprisingly accurate. No, we’re not talking aboutSaving Private Ryanhere, but the action scenes have a visceral, down-to-Earth quality that puts them in a different universe from the carefully choreographed lightsaber duels of the prequels.

Everything comes together in the finale, which connects a muddy gunfight on the surface of a tropical planet with a spectacular battle in the skies above. It’s a beautiful, thrilling sequence, leading into my favorite ending of anyStar Warsfilm.

So ultimately, I left the theater resigned to the fact that I’ll be seeing moreStar Warsmovies in the future. I’m sure I’ll be disappointed by some of them. ButRogue Oneconvinced me that this far away galaxy still has plenty of interesting corners worth exploring.