Get your Startup Battlefield application in by July 5th!

Startup Battlefield hopefuls, it’s time to stop procrastinating andapply for the Startup Battlefieldat Disrupt SF. We’re looking for promising startups from the U.S. and abroad to compete on the biggest stage in tech.

Look, we get it, you’re super busy. Maybe you’ve been working extra hard to make some key advances in your company or find the perfect hire, or maybe you just forgot when the actual deadline was. Whatever the reason, now’s the time to get your application submitted by July 5th at 12pm PT.

Go ahead, do it now. We’ll wait.Submit an application here.

The event will take place September 12-14 at the lovely Pier 48. Each day of Disrupt, young startups take the stage and pitch for six minutes. With the world watching, founders then face a live Q&A session with our judges — investors, founders and CEOs. Former judges includeBrian Pokorny(SV Angel),Roelof Botha(Sequoia Capital),Beth Seidenberg(Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers),Aileen Lee(Cowboy Ventures) andJeff Clavier(SoftTech VC).

Teams are competing for $50,000 and the illustrious Disrupt Cup.

So who have we had on our Battlefield stage and what do they do after launching with us? Agrilyst, theStartup Battlefield winner at Disrupt SF 2015,raised a seed round of $1 millionled by Brooklyn Bridge Ventures. Fleet,formerly Shipstrof Disrupt SF 2014,raised a $4 million seed roundto build out the Yelp of international cargo shipping. And 6SensorLabs, recent winner of our Hardware Battlefield,raised a $9.2 million Series Ato develop a line of food allergy testers.

As a whole, companies that participated in Startup Battlefield haveraised over $6.1 billionand had over 76 exits.

Disrupt SF will take place September 12-14 at Pier 48. Selected companies also receive free demo space in Startup Alley, tickets to VIP events, a Battlefield-only reception and, of course, TechCrunch swag. Prior to the event, startups work with TechCrunch editors to hone and polish their pitches.

All verticals are welcome, including (but not limited to) biotech, security, supercomputing, e-commerce, enterprise software, on-demand services, battery technology, mobile consumer, healthcare, bitcoin, hardware and the next big thing in dev tools.

Full details on eligibility can be foundhere. There are no fees to participate in the Startup Battlefield.

Building a great company encompasses much more than strong launch but, in our humble opinion, it doesn’t hurt to come out of the gate strong, too. Applications are open through July 5th at 12pm PT. To apply, head on over to ourStartup Battlefield page.