Replicated raises $5 million for its product taking SAAS products out of the cloud

Los Angeles-basedReplicatedhas raised $5 million to build out its service that takes software-as-a-service companies down from the “cloud”, TechCrunch has learned.

The company, which operates under the somewhat contrarian belief that not all services are going to be delivered in the cloud, provides a toolkit that lets software companies offer their products on premise behind a corporate firewall rather than delivered remotely.

Replicated recently launched from beta and will use the fresh $5 million commitment from Amplify Partners and Webb Investment Network to continue its sales and marketing and product development efforts.

Customers are already using the service, including Sysdig, CircleCI, Jama Software, Readme.io, Waffle.io, and Plot.ly. These startups — along with roughly 30 other beta users are providing software to over 300 enterprise software customers.

Using Replicated’s container-based service, software developers can manage and distribute installable versions of their products on premise. What’s more, the company says it can use a software vendor’s existing codebase and cloud deployment processes.

The company previously raised $1.5 million in a seed round from BoldStart Ventures, Founder Collective, TenOneTen, Mucker Capital and other undisclosed investors.

As my colleague,Ron Miller noted at the time of the company’s launch, it’s the second startup for co-founders Grant Miller and Marc Campbell.

The two had previously launched Look.io, a customer service chat app bought by LivePerson in 2012.

The new service has a potentially bigger market, according to Rob Witoff, a director at Coinbase and an end-user of the Replicated service.

“Smart companies protect their data while giving staff a first-class experience with the latest tools,” said Witoff. “We’ve been able to efficiently and securely manage a suite of modern, well maintained internal applications that our team loves by deploying these applications through Replicated. This kind of efficiency just wasn’t possible before.”