Third batch of Disrupt SF Hackathon tickets now available

Disrupt SF 2016is right around the corner, and soon thousands of the best and brightest entrepreneurs and tech enthusiasts will make their way to San Francisco’s Pier 48 for the show.

But one of our favorite parts of Disrupt actually happens before the show floor opens up for the week — the Disrupt Hackathon. We’re happy to announce that the third wave of tickets to the hackathon is now available, so if you want to spend a fun-filled weekend building the next great startup, be sure to get your completely free hackathon ticket now.

The hackathon starts at 12:30 p.m. PT on Saturday, September 10 with networking and the formation of the hackathon teams. On Sunday, after more than 20 hours of pouring blood, sweat and tears into their projects, teams will have just 60 seconds to pitch their projects to a panel of judges on the Disrupt stage.

In addition to building something awesome, teams have the chance to win tickets to the main Disrupt conference, a $5,000 grand prize, and several toys, gadgets and other monetary prizes from our fabulous hackathon sponsors.

All teams that earn a score of 3 or higher from our judges win two free tickets to Disrupt, which takes place September 12-14 at the same location. While at Disrupt, you’ll get to chat with founders of hundreds of startups in Startup and Hardware Alley, watch companies compete in the Startup Battlefield, and keep the party going long into the night with the parties and after-parties during the show.

Plus, you’ll get to hear from some of the more brilliant minds in the business with the many interviews and fireside chats that take place throughout the show.

The hackathon is a great place for both hardware and software companies alike, so be sure to grab whatever wonderful idea you have and get ready to spend a weekend bringing it that much closer to reality.

Of course, you’ll need a ticket first, so be sure to grab oneover on our ticketing page.

OursponsorshelpmakeDisrupthappen. If you are interested in learning more aboutsponsorshipopportunities, please contactoursponsorshipteam atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.