Why Pokémon Go captured our imagination — and huge market share

When a franchise that essentially died more than a decade ago comes back to life with such fervor, we need to ask ourselves how and why that happened. And if you’re able to stop playingPokémonGolong enough to read this article, you’ll find the phenomenon is deeply rooted in evolutionary psychology.

Matthew Lynleyrecently explainedthe brilliant ploys used by the creators ofPokémonGoto promote engagement, retention and virality. As a web psychologist, I am naturally inclined to dive deep into the aspects of human behavior that make us prone to embrace the game.

From an evolutionary standpoint,ourbrains operate much better in a natural environment that’s rooted deeply inourmind, compared to a setting based in virtual reality.Ourbehavior is governed by two parallel processes: The conscious process that revolves aroundourimmediate tasks (in this case, winningPokémonGo) and the unconscious process that is responsible for ensuring that there are no threats or sudden changes inourenvironment.

When playing virtual reality games, the unconscious computation inourbrains is forced to work much harder, because it’s not familiar with this strange virtual reality environment. In contrast, playingPokémonGoinvolvesouractual environment, with whichourmind is far more familiar; thus, playing within that setting delivers a comforting feeling of cognitive fluency — a mental shortcut that signals familiarity in a treacherous world.

The idea behind cognitive fluency might seem obvious —people prefer things that are easy to think about. The experience of the real world is psychologically easier to process than that of the VR world of other games. Fluency guidesourthinking in situations where we have no idea that it’s at work, and it affects us in any situation where we need to process information.

This sense of familiarity has a strong influence over what types of things people find attractive and enjoyable. Playing games in a familiar setting is much more enjoyable, and familiarity has played a strong role in human survival. In prehistoric times, if something (or someone) was familiar, it meant that you had already interacted with it, so it was probably not going to kill you.PokémonGoscratches some basic psychological itches. First, the game itself is simple to understand and easy to play, for children and adults alike. Each time a level advances, the challenge is revived and thus the crave is renewed and the desire to continue receiving those fresh doses of gratification causes us to continue playing.Techcrunch eventExhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Exhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Berkeley, CA|June 5BOOK NOWOne of the rewarding building blocks of the game is the unexpected gratification of finding the monsters as we walk. We don’t know when to expect them; they can appear at any time or place.Ourattraction to this kind of action is attributed to a neurotransmitter called dopamine, a chemical found inourbrain.Scientists initially associated dopamine with feelings of enjoyment (a high level of dopamine being visible during activities such as eating chocolate, having sex and hearing favorite music), but research in the past decade has indicated that dopamine has additional functions besides activating gratification and pleasure. This molecule helps us in detecting changes in the environment.The system centers around expectations. We can expect high levels of dopamine when we encounter unexpected rewards (three or four times as excited, as measured by the strength of the dopaminergic firing). In other words, the reward is more pleasurable the more surprising it is.When we receive unexpected cash on a randomized basis, it forces us more strongly into obsessively repeatingouraction than cash on a predictable basis would. This tendency was best illustrated by B.F. Skinner, a pioneer of behavioral psychology, in the 1950s. When his lab rats received an unexpected reward from pushing a pedal, they would continue pushing it even after the reward stopped arriving. This element of surprise helps explain why people just can’t get enough ofPokémonGo.Additional bursts of pleasure also come from the nostalgia this game evokes. Being outside chasing monsters activates old and enjoyable memories, providing us with a priceless opportunity to relive a piece ofourchildhood again, and bringourchildhood experiences to life. It activates memories from a simpler time in which we were out in the streets playing social games like tag or hide-and-seek.Those games we used to play involved human partners, or at least involved manipulating real objects in real space (like throwing a ball).PokémonGoplayers feel as if they are taking part in an actual activity with other people, rather than a remote observer behind a screen. Throwing the ball at aPokémonbrings up exciting memories that were closed in a box that belongs to the past. These memories have a positive influence onourwell-being as we get a secret key to a magical period.In addition, playingPokémonGo can fulfill an everlasting fantasy. Walking through the streets fighting monsters that pop up unexpectedly out of nowhere can easily driveourimaginationto assume the masterful role of superhero, or warrior, fulfilling a fantasy and givingoursenses and emotions an other-worldly experience. Such games boost adrenaline levels, and they awaken strong feelings of power — as well as frustration, gratification and enjoyment.A central part of the gratificationPokémonGoplayers experience is akin to the old-fashioned games we used to play, where people wouldgooutside and interact more socially. Manystudies have illustrated the mood-boosting effect of physical activity, and social ties are equally important for mental health. Some research suggests that even shallow conversation with strangers boosts well-being.However,Dr. David Sackrecently cautioned inPsychology Todayabout the fine line between behavior and addiction, questioning whetherPokémonGowill drive up the percentages of internet addiction or pathological gaming.He quotes aDSM-5 fact sheetstudying gamers: “When these individuals are engrossed in Internet games, certain pathways in their brains are triggered in the same direct and intense way that a drug addict’sbrainis affected by a particular substance. The gaming prompts a neurological response that influences feelings of pleasure and reward, and the result, in the extreme, is manifested as addictive behavior.”“Such compulsive play pushes aside other interests and responsibilities, threatening relationships, academics, jobs and more,” Dr. Sack writes. “Although this research focused on traditional online gamers, it’s no stretch to expect the same to apply toPokémonGoplayers.”To conclude, there is a thin line between having fun with a game and becoming addicted to it. The problem is that this line starts creating changes inourbrain, generating new connections — before we even realize we are addicted.

This sense of familiarity has a strong influence over what types of things people find attractive and enjoyable. Playing games in a familiar setting is much more enjoyable, and familiarity has played a strong role in human survival. In prehistoric times, if something (or someone) was familiar, it meant that you had already interacted with it, so it was probably not going to kill you.

PokémonGoscratches some basic psychological itches. First, the game itself is simple to understand and easy to play, for children and adults alike. Each time a level advances, the challenge is revived and thus the crave is renewed and the desire to continue receiving those fresh doses of gratification causes us to continue playing.

One of the rewarding building blocks of the game is the unexpected gratification of finding the monsters as we walk. We don’t know when to expect them; they can appear at any time or place.Ourattraction to this kind of action is attributed to a neurotransmitter called dopamine, a chemical found inourbrain.

Scientists initially associated dopamine with feelings of enjoyment (a high level of dopamine being visible during activities such as eating chocolate, having sex and hearing favorite music), but research in the past decade has indicated that dopamine has additional functions besides activating gratification and pleasure. This molecule helps us in detecting changes in the environment.

The system centers around expectations. We can expect high levels of dopamine when we encounter unexpected rewards (three or four times as excited, as measured by the strength of the dopaminergic firing). In other words, the reward is more pleasurable the more surprising it is.

When we receive unexpected cash on a randomized basis, it forces us more strongly into obsessively repeatingouraction than cash on a predictable basis would. This tendency was best illustrated by B.F. Skinner, a pioneer of behavioral psychology, in the 1950s. When his lab rats received an unexpected reward from pushing a pedal, they would continue pushing it even after the reward stopped arriving. This element of surprise helps explain why people just can’t get enough ofPokémonGo.

Additional bursts of pleasure also come from the nostalgia this game evokes. Being outside chasing monsters activates old and enjoyable memories, providing us with a priceless opportunity to relive a piece ofourchildhood again, and bringourchildhood experiences to life. It activates memories from a simpler time in which we were out in the streets playing social games like tag or hide-and-seek.

Those games we used to play involved human partners, or at least involved manipulating real objects in real space (like throwing a ball).PokémonGoplayers feel as if they are taking part in an actual activity with other people, rather than a remote observer behind a screen. Throwing the ball at aPokémonbrings up exciting memories that were closed in a box that belongs to the past. These memories have a positive influence onourwell-being as we get a secret key to a magical period.In addition, playingPokémonGo can fulfill an everlasting fantasy. Walking through the streets fighting monsters that pop up unexpectedly out of nowhere can easily driveourimaginationto assume the masterful role of superhero, or warrior, fulfilling a fantasy and givingoursenses and emotions an other-worldly experience. Such games boost adrenaline levels, and they awaken strong feelings of power — as well as frustration, gratification and enjoyment.A central part of the gratificationPokémonGoplayers experience is akin to the old-fashioned games we used to play, where people wouldgooutside and interact more socially. Manystudies have illustrated the mood-boosting effect of physical activity, and social ties are equally important for mental health. Some research suggests that even shallow conversation with strangers boosts well-being.However,Dr. David Sackrecently cautioned inPsychology Todayabout the fine line between behavior and addiction, questioning whetherPokémonGowill drive up the percentages of internet addiction or pathological gaming.He quotes aDSM-5 fact sheetstudying gamers: “When these individuals are engrossed in Internet games, certain pathways in their brains are triggered in the same direct and intense way that a drug addict’sbrainis affected by a particular substance. The gaming prompts a neurological response that influences feelings of pleasure and reward, and the result, in the extreme, is manifested as addictive behavior.”“Such compulsive play pushes aside other interests and responsibilities, threatening relationships, academics, jobs and more,” Dr. Sack writes. “Although this research focused on traditional online gamers, it’s no stretch to expect the same to apply toPokémonGoplayers.”To conclude, there is a thin line between having fun with a game and becoming addicted to it. The problem is that this line starts creating changes inourbrain, generating new connections — before we even realize we are addicted.

Those games we used to play involved human partners, or at least involved manipulating real objects in real space (like throwing a ball).PokémonGoplayers feel as if they are taking part in an actual activity with other people, rather than a remote observer behind a screen. Throwing the ball at aPokémonbrings up exciting memories that were closed in a box that belongs to the past. These memories have a positive influence onourwell-being as we get a secret key to a magical period.

In addition, playingPokémonGo can fulfill an everlasting fantasy. Walking through the streets fighting monsters that pop up unexpectedly out of nowhere can easily driveourimaginationto assume the masterful role of superhero, or warrior, fulfilling a fantasy and givingoursenses and emotions an other-worldly experience. Such games boost adrenaline levels, and they awaken strong feelings of power — as well as frustration, gratification and enjoyment.

A central part of the gratificationPokémonGoplayers experience is akin to the old-fashioned games we used to play, where people wouldgooutside and interact more socially. Manystudies have illustrated the mood-boosting effect of physical activity, and social ties are equally important for mental health. Some research suggests that even shallow conversation with strangers boosts well-being.

However,Dr. David Sackrecently cautioned inPsychology Todayabout the fine line between behavior and addiction, questioning whetherPokémonGowill drive up the percentages of internet addiction or pathological gaming.He quotes aDSM-5 fact sheetstudying gamers: “When these individuals are engrossed in Internet games, certain pathways in their brains are triggered in the same direct and intense way that a drug addict’sbrainis affected by a particular substance. The gaming prompts a neurological response that influences feelings of pleasure and reward, and the result, in the extreme, is manifested as addictive behavior.”“Such compulsive play pushes aside other interests and responsibilities, threatening relationships, academics, jobs and more,” Dr. Sack writes. “Although this research focused on traditional online gamers, it’s no stretch to expect the same to apply toPokémonGoplayers.”To conclude, there is a thin line between having fun with a game and becoming addicted to it. The problem is that this line starts creating changes inourbrain, generating new connections — before we even realize we are addicted.

However,Dr. David Sackrecently cautioned inPsychology Todayabout the fine line between behavior and addiction, questioning whetherPokémonGowill drive up the percentages of internet addiction or pathological gaming.

He quotes aDSM-5 fact sheetstudying gamers: “When these individuals are engrossed in Internet games, certain pathways in their brains are triggered in the same direct and intense way that a drug addict’sbrainis affected by a particular substance. The gaming prompts a neurological response that influences feelings of pleasure and reward, and the result, in the extreme, is manifested as addictive behavior.”

“Such compulsive play pushes aside other interests and responsibilities, threatening relationships, academics, jobs and more,” Dr. Sack writes. “Although this research focused on traditional online gamers, it’s no stretch to expect the same to apply toPokémonGoplayers.”

To conclude, there is a thin line between having fun with a game and becoming addicted to it. The problem is that this line starts creating changes inourbrain, generating new connections — before we even realize we are addicted.