Twitter’s new button lets you accept private messages from your website

Twitter today continues to push forward with its increased emphasis on its messaging feature, with the rollout ofa new button for websitesthat allows visitors to privately message an individual or company directly. The feature, now one of several website buttons available, follows the company’s recent test of a change to brands’ customer support profiles’ thatencouraged users to direct message, not tweet, at the business’s Twitter account.

In that case, a new “Message” button appeared on the profile on mobile – taking over the full space where “Tweet to” and “Message” used to live side-by-side. Early testers included big names like Apple, Uber, Beats, Activision, and others.

Today’s update, meanwhile, is about making it easier to message a business from the web.

The company already offered buttons for following, sharing, mentioning, and hashtags, but not DM’s. So, to some extent, this is just about Twitter rounding out its product offerings to be more comprehensive.

Announcing our new Message button. Now people can easily slide into your DMs from your website. Get yours now!https://t.co/ash9ouvgzu

— Developers (@XDevelopers)August 24, 2016

However, the button’s arrival comes at a time when Facebook has been moving to make its chat app Messenger the default way that consumers interact with businesses.

The social networkrecently redesigned its business Pages, which puts a “Message” button at the top of the page, assuming the business in question uses chat. And earlier this year,it announced a suite of tools that made it easier for businesses to connect with customers on Messenger,including things like Messenger links and scannable Messenger codes for initiating chats, business usernames based on Page names, and Messenger greetings.

Twitter, meanwhile, has become known better as a place where consumers go to complain when things go wrong – often posting angry tweets, with the brand’s @username attached. By shipping more tools that let customers take that sentiment to a private chat, businesses could then continue to use Twitter as part of their marketing, consumer outreach, and support strategies, instead of shifting all their communications to Facebook.

Shortly after Twitter’sannouncementof the new button this afternoon, a few early testers reported they were getting error messages when they tried to use it. Apparently,the new buttonisn’t quite ready just yet, but should be functional in the near future.

pasted our user id and handlepic.twitter.com/ddBe0BVeAi

— Chirpify (@Chirpify)August 24, 2016

UPDATE: The feature is functional, the customer above didn’t fill out the form correctly.