Still a virtual reality skeptic? Here’s why you shouldn’t be

The original PlayStation console, launched when I was the managing director of Sony Computer Entertainment for Europe, shook the gaming world. The 3D environment was unfamiliar to gamers, and some in the industry at large were initially reluctant to adopt such a new technology. But with time, 3D gaming became the standard of video games, and 2D games began to be considered rigid and archaic. Consumers purchased PlayStation at record rates, buying100 million units, and blew out its Nintendo and Sega Saturn competition.

AsVRbecomes a force in the gaming world (and other sectors), withGoogleandFacebookmaking enthusiastic pushes in its innovation, I can’thelp but draw the evident parallels between the emergence of 3D-console gaming and quasi-nascentVR. Though someremainskepticalaboutVRand its likelihood of widespread use, it will become a widely adopted technology that can in turn drive adoption of other technologies, just like 3D-gaming technology did.

Like 3D gaming catalyzed the million-plus purchases of PlayStation — and later Xbox and other 3D-optimized consoles —VRcan play a significant role in incentivizing consumers to upgrade their mobile devices and/or operating systems. Specifically,VR’s capabilities can entice consumers to update their smartphones, the same way 3D gaming incentivized consumers to update their gaming consoles.

It’s no secret that Google’s mobile devices have plateaued in their upgrade appeal. In May 2016, just 35.6 percent of Android devices were running Android 5.0 to 5.1 Lollipop, which was released in 2014. What’s more, only 7.5 percent of Android devices are running Android 6.0 Marshmallow, the latest version of the operating system.

Despite, or maybe because of, these disappointing metrics, Google is rolling out theAndroid N, its next phone and tablet operating system.VRhas the potential to drive adoption rates of Android N, and Google is tapping into this potential with the recent announcement of Daydream’s mobile capabilities in theGoogle I/O keynote.VRcould even be the forcing function for users to adopt 4K smartphones, which I believe is the future of mobile technology.

Along with leveragingVRcapabilities to help with Android adoption rates,VRcan also be an important factor in convincing people to choose Android over the iPhone in the first place. Although there are rumors that Apple is covertly investing in aVRView-Master headsetthatmay work with the iPhone, we’re not really sure, and it’s unlikely consumers will actively hold out for this.

With that said, companies like Googleshouldn’tjump the gun in assuming that all consumers will want to upgrade immediately because ofVR.VRisstillperceived by many consumers as an impressive technology once removed. The pattern of new technology on the macro level starts like clothing in a fashion runway show — exciting to admire but separate from the flow of everyday life. Using 3D gaming as a fitting model, any new technology field matures by being brought to market first as a fringe item observed by the masses and used solely by the die-hard tech enthusiasts, and then it builds into something more.Techcrunch eventExhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Exhibit at TechCrunch Sessions: AISecure your spot at TC Sessions: AI and show 1,200+ decision-makers what you’ve built — without the big spend. Available through May 9 or while tables last.Berkeley, CA|June 5BOOK NOWRight now,VRis in that observational stage necessary to the cycle that I witnessed for 3D gaming while at Sony. Concrete consumer uses cases are the next step to promote adoption and integration into everyday life as the collective becomes accustomed to entirely immersiveVRexperiences.Another key factor in the technology integration cycle is the innovating parties. Currently, tech giants like Google and Facebook have made the biggest bets onVR, and much of the news about the emerging technology circulates around these two behemoths. AsVRripens, other creators will establish their products and uses forVR.This “build it and they will come” pattern has established itself in many technology cycles; if we makeVRan ecosystem attractive to developers, the industry will thrive on its own. In the months and years following PlayStation’s reveal, Sony discovered that though it could develop hardware and games exclusively in-house, independent video game designers were just as important, and a healthy competition between the two stimulated further innovation and creativity.Facebook and Google’s vision ofVR, andVR’s most known applications, are heavily consumer and gaming focused. However, enterpriseVRis becoming an important vertical that will only continue to grow in relevance, rather than remain untapped. EnterpriseVR/AR is already a prosperous alcove, with innovatorMetaboasting 1,000 enterprise organizations among its clientele.Outside of gaming, enterpriseVR/AR will help individuals and organizations find immediate value in the technology. As opposed to seeingVR/AR as a separate entity, VCs largely view it as solving problems in existing sectors. Qualcomm Ventures’ managing directorJason Ballsays “AR/VRis the new UX/UI for everything, but it will take time.” The funding environment is focused onSolve for X, withVR/AR as capabilities that can enhance the solution. To me, this means that enterprise/industrial use cases are where the money is/will be invested.Much like we’ve seen 3D capabilities unfold,VRwill make room for third-party organizations to find their niche, whether that be consumer-facing or siloed to the enterprise. Powered by innovation, companies large and small will carve out their own space and offerings within the technology to make its applications broader.VRhas great potential even beyond consumer-facing services, and will be implemented in all types of industries. Though it’s currently admired at a distance by most consumers and organizations, the cycle of technology tells us that adoption is not far off.

With that said, companies like Googleshouldn’tjump the gun in assuming that all consumers will want to upgrade immediately because ofVR.VRisstillperceived by many consumers as an impressive technology once removed. The pattern of new technology on the macro level starts like clothing in a fashion runway show — exciting to admire but separate from the flow of everyday life. Using 3D gaming as a fitting model, any new technology field matures by being brought to market first as a fringe item observed by the masses and used solely by the die-hard tech enthusiasts, and then it builds into something more.

Right now,VRis in that observational stage necessary to the cycle that I witnessed for 3D gaming while at Sony. Concrete consumer uses cases are the next step to promote adoption and integration into everyday life as the collective becomes accustomed to entirely immersiveVRexperiences.

Another key factor in the technology integration cycle is the innovating parties. Currently, tech giants like Google and Facebook have made the biggest bets onVR, and much of the news about the emerging technology circulates around these two behemoths. AsVRripens, other creators will establish their products and uses forVR.

This “build it and they will come” pattern has established itself in many technology cycles; if we makeVRan ecosystem attractive to developers, the industry will thrive on its own. In the months and years following PlayStation’s reveal, Sony discovered that though it could develop hardware and games exclusively in-house, independent video game designers were just as important, and a healthy competition between the two stimulated further innovation and creativity.

Facebook and Google’s vision ofVR, andVR’s most known applications, are heavily consumer and gaming focused. However, enterpriseVRis becoming an important vertical that will only continue to grow in relevance, rather than remain untapped. EnterpriseVR/AR is already a prosperous alcove, with innovatorMetaboasting 1,000 enterprise organizations among its clientele.

Outside of gaming, enterpriseVR/AR will help individuals and organizations find immediate value in the technology. As opposed to seeingVR/AR as a separate entity, VCs largely view it as solving problems in existing sectors. Qualcomm Ventures’ managing directorJason Ballsays “AR/VRis the new UX/UI for everything, but it will take time.” The funding environment is focused onSolve for X, withVR/AR as capabilities that can enhance the solution. To me, this means that enterprise/industrial use cases are where the money is/will be invested.Much like we’ve seen 3D capabilities unfold,VRwill make room for third-party organizations to find their niche, whether that be consumer-facing or siloed to the enterprise. Powered by innovation, companies large and small will carve out their own space and offerings within the technology to make its applications broader.VRhas great potential even beyond consumer-facing services, and will be implemented in all types of industries. Though it’s currently admired at a distance by most consumers and organizations, the cycle of technology tells us that adoption is not far off.

Outside of gaming, enterpriseVR/AR will help individuals and organizations find immediate value in the technology. As opposed to seeingVR/AR as a separate entity, VCs largely view it as solving problems in existing sectors. Qualcomm Ventures’ managing directorJason Ballsays “AR/VRis the new UX/UI for everything, but it will take time.” The funding environment is focused onSolve for X, withVR/AR as capabilities that can enhance the solution. To me, this means that enterprise/industrial use cases are where the money is/will be invested.

Much like we’ve seen 3D capabilities unfold,VRwill make room for third-party organizations to find their niche, whether that be consumer-facing or siloed to the enterprise. Powered by innovation, companies large and small will carve out their own space and offerings within the technology to make its applications broader.

VRhas great potential even beyond consumer-facing services, and will be implemented in all types of industries. Though it’s currently admired at a distance by most consumers and organizations, the cycle of technology tells us that adoption is not far off.