Musement, a “digital travel companion” and ticketing platform, raises $10M Series B

Musement, a “digital travel companion” that lets travellers discover and book things to do, has closed $10 million in Series B funding. The round was led by family fund Micheli Associati, with participation fromprevious backersP101, and 360 Capital Partners.

Founded and launched in 2013, Musement aims to consolidate the tours and activities market by providing a single online destination to discover and book in-destination activities.

“Whether travellers want a food, wine or wellness experience, access to nightlife destinations or a specialist guided tour, we wanted Musement to provide a single port of call for all their needs,” explains Musement co-founder and CEO Alessandro Petazzi.

The startup provides an end-to-end ticketing service that allows travellers to receive a push notification when close to an attraction and then book a ticket, skip the line at the venue.

“The technology pioneered by us performs real time checks on whether a venue has same day tickets, if there is current availability and if the venue accepts e-tickets allowing travellers to maximise their time at a destination and effectively eliminating one of the tour and activity sector’s biggest growth hurdles to date,” says Petazzi.

More recently, Musement has launched a chatbot for Messenger to help you look for things to do in a city. However, key to these consumer experiences are partnerships the company has with major players in the travel industry.

“Our bespoke end-to-end platforms that we develop specifically for travel agents, hotels, airlines and venues, have enabled us to ink deals with some of the world’s largest travel industry organisations this year including Travelport, 15below and Trekksoft,” says the Musement CEO.

Meanwhile, the company plans to use the new capital to invest further in its technology, and for growth — it currently operates in 450 cities across 55 countries in 7 languages. This will include additional offices to complement its HQ in Milan and recently opened Spanish office in Barcelona.

Adds Petazzi: “Our goal was also to make a seamless booking experience across all verticals, helping consumers to discover things that are relevant to them, whether at home or travelling. Until now, this integrated experience had never been achieved and our new funding round will assist us in executing this vision even further”.