Sign up to volunteer at Disrupt London 2016

Are you interested in rolling up your sleeves and get to work helping the TechCrunch Disrupt team put on the best startup show in Europe? If so, you should definitely sign up to be a Work Exchange Volunteer atDisrupt London 2016.

Applications are now open, and you cansubmit one here.

Volunteers selected for the Work Exchange program are required to work up to 16 hours during the conference. You’ll be assigned to various tasks, such as assembling the VIP goodie bags, staffing registration and scanning tickets, giving directions and answering attendee questions, moving boxes, placing signage or even helping out with the hackathon presentations.

These things ensure our guests and presenters have an exceptional experience at the show, and we need your help to get it all done.

Work Exchange volunteers must be available for a mandatory orientation training on Friday, December 2 at 4pm at the Copper Box Arena. Volunteers must also be available to work shifts starting that same day after the orientation through to the last day of the conference on December 6. Shifts can start as early as 6 a.m. and end as late as 11 p.m., with each shift lasting anywhere from 2.5 to 8 hours.

In exchange for a little bit of work, volunteers are treated to an all-access pass to Disrupt, so you can take in the show when you’re not on shift. There, you’ll have the opportunity to network with the prominent people and companies attending the show. Plus, you’ll also get to connect and share learnings with other Work Exchange volunteers, creating lasting connections and friendships with like-minded startup enthusiasts.

Those who are accepted into the program are required to cover their own meals, housing and travel expenses. There will likely be some opportunities for Work Exchange volunteers to share rooms, and we’ll send along an invitation to the program’sSlackpage to all those selected, so that you can connect with all the other Work Exchange volunteers ahead of time.

You can apply to be a Work Exchange volunteer by filling outthis brief formno later than November 15, 2016. We’ll notify those selected into the program via email shortly after applications close, and those selected will need to respond to the email to secure their spot in the program.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team atsponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.