WorldRemit CEO Ismail Ahmed to speak at Disrupt London

TechCrunch Disrupt Londonis coming this December. The two-day conference runs December 5 to 6 in the Olympic Village’s Copper Box Arena and features Startup Alley and Startup Battlefield where one startup will take home £30,000.You can buy early-bird tickets for Disrupt London here.

We’re delighted to announce that we will be joined by the founder and CEO ofWorldRemit, Ismail Ahmed.

For Ismail, founding WorldRemit was the culmination of 20 years’ experience in the money transfer industry – spanning academic, consulting and in-house roles. Before setting-up his own business, he worked for the United Nations Remittance Programme, helping African money transfer companies comply with tough anti-money laundering rules introduced after the 9/11 attacks.

Ismail has published widely-cited research on the effect of remittances in Somaliland following the country’s civil war.

He holds an MSc and PhD from the University of London and an Executive MBA from London Business School.

TechCrunch Disrupt is a big event.

Extra early-bird tickets are nowavailable to purchasefor the discounted price of just £800 a piece. Or sign up with a co-worker and you can save an additional £100 off each ticket with our multi-ticket (2+) discount. You can get your tickets at this price until September 23.

For all you students out there, the deal is about to get even sweeter. We have a limited selection of student tickets to Disrupt London 2016 for just £100 plus VAT, provided you have both a valid university ID and current transcripts.

To reserve your £100 student tickets to Disrupt, simply send a copy of your transcripts showing your current enrollment status, as well as a copy of your university identification card to students@beta.techcrunch.com. Once you’re approved, we’ll send you instructions for how to complete your registration.

Our sponsors help make Disrupt happen. If you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities, please contact our sponsorship team at sponsors@beta.techcrunch.com.