Google opens up its Virtual Reality field trips for all, debuts new apps and services for teachers

On the heels ofAmazon’s entry into the learning materials market,Google this morning also unveileda series of product announcementsaimed at expanding use of Google products and technologies in the classroom setting. At theISTE conferencetoday, the company introduced a number of new tools for educators, ranging from aresearch project that helps teaches kids to code called Project Bloksto an expansion of its Google Cardboard-assisted “Expeditions” program, plus several new tools and services for the classroom involving Google Docs, Chromebooks and Google Cast.

Expeditions

The Expeditions programlaunched in September of last yearas way to take students on “virtual reality field trips.” That is, using a Google Cardboard viewer,  and an accompanyingExpeditions app, students can be transported to far-away locales, whether that’s exploring the ancient ruins at Machu Picchu, natural wonders like the rainforest, or places you would likely never otherwise be able to visit, like Antarctica.

Since its launch, over a million students in 11 countries have gone on these virtual trips, Google now says. And its collections of destinations has grown to over 200, including also those made by established educational providers, like Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, and soon, Pearson.

Today, Google says that its making the Expeditions program available to everyone – all they’ll need are Google Cardboard devices and smartphones, or tablets in 2D full-screen mode.

[youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MQ9yG_QfDA]

The Expeditions app, which works on Android today, will have an iOS counterpart in the near future, too, notes Google. In addition,Best Buy Educationwill also now be making Expeditions kits available for schools to purchase which include a tablet, the virtual reality viewers, and a router. These can be pre-ordered for the upcoming school year.

New Apps: “Google Cast for Education” plus “Explain Everything,” “Soundtrap” and “WeVideo for Chromebooks”

The company additionally announced a free Chrome app calledGoogle Cast for Education, which works with theGoogle Classroomservice in order to move audio and video across school networks, while also offering built-in controls for teachers. The app runs on the teacher’s computer, so there’s no additional hardware needs as with the Chromecast devices. Teachers run the Cast for Education app, and students can also share their screens using the existing “Cast” feature in the Chrome browser.

[youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=07KFD5fGq_4]

In classrooms where Chromebooks are used, there’s a trio of new apps making their debut. Interactive whiteboardExplain Everything, music and podcast makerSoundtrap, and video project toolWeVideoare creative apps built by partners that are now offered at a discounted rate to schools when purchased together – whether that’s alongside Chromebooks or as standalone subscriptions. Google says it collaborated withEdTechTeacheron this collection of apps.

Google Docs gets Quizzes that grade themselves

Finally, the company announced a new feature inQuizzes in Google Formswhich lets teachers automatically grade multiple choice tests and checkbox questions. Teachers can also add review materials like explanations, supplemental websites or review videos, instead of just marking answers as wrong. Teachers can also now disable a setting that lets students send themselves a copy of their responses which was highly requested. (Google Classroomoffers something similar to the quiz tool, but this is more of a standalone offering.)

Google is demoing the new tools at the ISTE event in Denver, and will also publish more details on itsGoogle for Education blogthis week.